NOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
ri|v.
2	1. Gallia est omnis, &c.	“	All	Gaul	is	divided	into	three	part*.”
Cfflsar here means by u Gaul” that part which had not yet been subdued by the Romans. The latter had already reduced the Allobroges in the south, and had formed in that quarter what was called “ Gallia Provincia” or “ Gallia Narbonensis,” or, as is the ca«e in these commentaries, simply “ Provincia.” Consult Geographi cal Index.
Quarum. Supply parttum.
Tertiam, qui, &c.	“	The	third, they who are called in then
own language Celt®, in ours Galli.” The order of construction Is, (ii) qui appellantur Celt a, ipsorum lingua, Galli nostra (lingua, incolunt) tertiam (partem).
Celtae. The Celt® mark the parent stem, or genuine Gallic race. From the extent of their territory, the Greeks gave the whole country of Gaul the name of TLsXruth {Celtica). Among the earlier Greeks, the whole of western Europe, at some distance from the shores of the Mediterranean, went by the appellation of the ‘‘ Celtic land,” x&qa KeXnicfi- {Scymn. Ch. v., 166.) Consult Geographical Index. The term Galli is only “ Gael” Latinized.
6. Lingua. This is not correct as regards the Belg® and Celt®, who merely spoke two different dialects of the same tongue, the former being of the Cymric, the latter of the Gallic stock. The Aquitani, however, would appear to have belonged to the Iberian race, and to have spoken a language of Iberian origin. (Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. i., Introd. p. xii., seq.)
Institutis. “ In customs.”—Inter se. “ From one another.” Literally, “ among themselves.”
Gallos ab Aquitanis, &c.	“	The	river	Garumna	separates
the Galli from the Aquitani, the Matrona and Sequana divide them from the Belg®.” With flumen supply dividit. The student will note, that the singular verb dividit follows after the two nominatives Matrona and Sequana, as referring to one continuous boundary, and to the circumstance also of the Matrona being only a tributary of the Sequana.
Fortissimi sunt Beiges. The same idea is expressed in Tacitus, Hist. 4, 76.—A cultu alque humanitate Provincia. “ From the civilization and intellectual refinement of the province.” Cultus refers here to the mode of life, humanitas to mental improvement and culture; and hence cultus is given by Oberlinus, in his Index Latinitatis, as “ vita ratio, ab omni ruditate remota.” The civilization and refinement of the Roman province was principally derived from the Greek city of Massilia, now Marseilles. (Justin, 43, 4.>NOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Minime soepe commeant. “ Least frequently resort,,T i. e., very 3 seldom penetrate to these distant regions.—Ad cfeminandos animos. “ To enervate their minds,” i. e., break down their warlike spirit.
Proximique sunt Germania. “ And because they are nearest to the Germans,” i. e., are in their immediate neighbourhood. According to the punctuation which we have adopted, this is the corresponding clause to the one beginning with propterea quod.
Helvetii quoque. Because they also dwell near the Germans.
Cum. “ On which occasions.” — Eos. Referring to the
Germans.—Autipsi, &c.	“	Or	else	they themselves carry on war
in the territories of the latter.” Ipsi refers to the Helvetii.
Eorum una pars. “ One part of these main divisions of Gaul.” Eorum refers back to Hi omnes, or, in other words, to the Belgae, Celtae, and Aquitani. As, however, the idea of territory is necessarily involved, we may, in order to adapt the phrase to our idiom, translate as if there were an ellipsis of finium, though, in reality, none such is to be supplied. As regards the remote reference which sometimes occurs in the case of kic and is, consult Perizontus, ad Sanct. Min. 2, 9 (vol. i., p. 276, ed. Bauer), where the present passage comes under review.
Obtinere. “ Possess.” Obtineo is here used in its primitive
and genuine sense, “to hold against others,” i. e., “to possess” or “ enjoy.” — Initium capit, &c.	“ Commences at the river
Rhone.” Literally, “ takes its beginning from the river Rhone.”
Continetur. “ Is bounded.” Literally, “ is encompassed”
or “ hemmed in.”—Attingit etiam, &c.	“	It	touches	also on the
Rhine in the quarter of the Sequani and Helvetii.” More literally,
“ on the side of the Sequani and Helvetii,” i. e., where these two communities dwell.
Vergit ad septentriones. “It stretches away towards the north.” Literally, “ it inclines” or “ tends towards the north,”
\. e., from its point of commencement on the Rhodanus.
Ab extremis Gallia finibus. “ From the farthest confines of Gaul.” By Gaul is here meant the middle division of the country, or that occupied by the Celt», who have been mentioned in the preceding sentence under the name of Galli. By fines extremi Caesar means the boundaries most remote from Rome, or, in other words, the northern.
Spectant in septentriones, &c.	“ They look towaids the
north and the rising sun,” i. e., their country, commencing on the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK
Page.
3 northern borders of Celtica, faces, or stretches away to the norto and east.
Et eampartem Oceani, Sic. “ And that part of the Atlantic Ocean which is next to Spain,” i. e., in the immediate vicinity of Spain, and washing its northern coast. The reference is to the lower part of the Bay of Biscay. As regards the force of ad in this passage, compare the common form of expression esse ad urbem, “ to be near the city,” and Cicero (Ep. ad Fam. 15, 2), Castra ad Cybistra locavi. “ I pitched my camp in the neighbourhood of Cybistra.”
Spectat inter, See. “ It looks between the setting of the sun and the north,” i. e., it looks northwest; it faces towards that point Morus thinks we ought to read in for inter; but the Greek paraphrase sanctions the common lection : ifopq Si rd pira^v *Ap*rwp n
. teed ’AfaroXQv.
’*'13. Orgetorix. This name is said by Celtic scholars to mean Hchief of a hundred hills,” from or, “a hill,” ced, “a hundred,” and righ, “ a chief.” (Compare Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. ii., p. -289 )
Marco Messala, &c.	“	Marcus	Messala	and Marcus Piw.
being consuls,” i. e., in the consulship of Marcus Messala and Marcus Piso. Supply existentibus. The date is A. U. C. 693, B. C. 61.
Regni cupiditate inductus. “ Led on by a desire of enjoying the chief authority.” Regni is to be here regarded as equivalent to regnandi.—Nobilitatis. The higher class of chieftains are meant.
Civitati. “ His state,” i. e., the people. By civitas are here meant all the inhabitants of a district or state, under one and the same government. This usage is very frequent in our author.
De finibus suis. “ From their territories.” Fines, in the sense of “territories” or “country,” is of very common occur rence in Caesar.
Imperio potiri. “ To possess themselves of the sovereignty,” i. e., to rule as masters over the other Gallic tribes.
Id hoc facilius, &c.	“	He	persuaded	them to that step the
more easily on this account.” The order is, persuasit id eis facilius hoc.— Undique loci natura continentur. “Are confined on al, sides by the nature of their situation,” i. e., are kept in, are pie- vented from wandering far.
Monte Jura. The name, in Celtic, is said to mean “ the domain of God,” from Jou, an appellation for the Deity, and rag, the domain of a chieftain or ruler. The term appears a very appropriate
Digitized by GoogleNOTES UN THE FIRST HOOK.
ane to be applied by a barbarous people to a lofty mountain-range. ^ Consult Geographical Index.
Lacu Lemanno. Now the Lake of Geneva. Strabo gives the form Ai/dwa, the Greek paraphrast Aep&vog.
Minus late. “ Less widely,” i. e., than they could have W Bhed.—Homines bellandi cupidi. “ Men (like themselves) fond of warfare.”
Pro multitudine, &c.	“	They	thought, besides, that they
possessed narrow territories, considering the extent of their popula tion, and their high character for war and bravery.” More literally,
“ narrow territories, in proportion to the number of inhabitants,” &c.
Qui in longitudinem, &c. “ Which extended in length,” &c. Cluverius condemns the inaccuracy of this measurement, both as regards length and breadth. (Germ. 2, 4 ) But we must bear in mind that Caesar, when he wrote this, had never been in that land of the Helvetii, and followed, therefore, merely the rude estimate furnished him by some of that nation. Caesar makes Jhe length qf Helvetia forty-eight geographical miles; the true distance, however, from Geneva to the Lake of Constance, is only forty. (Marinqrts vol. ii., p. 214.)
His rebus adducti. “ Induced by these considerations.”—Ad ^ proficiscendum. “To their departure.”
2 Carrorum. “ Of wagons.” This term has two forms for the nominative, carrus and carrum. Caesar employs the former, and the author of the commentaries on the Spanish war the latter (c.
6). The word is of Celtic origin, and denotes a kind of four- wheeled wagon. Compare the German Karre. In later Latinity the neuter form prevailed. (Adelung, Gloss. Med. et Inf. Lot. voL ii.,p. 231.)
Sementes quam maximas facere. “To make as extensive sowings as possible,” i. e., to sow as much land as possible.
In tertium annum, &c.	“ They fix upon their departure for
the third year by a law,” i. e., they fix upon the third year for their departure. The term lege is here employed as denoting merely the assent of the general assembly of the nation to the proposition of Orgetorix. It is analogous, therefore, in the present instance, to decreto.
Ad eas res confidendas. The repetition of this phrase here is extremely inelegant, though it may be cited as one proof, among others that might be adduced, of Caesar’s having hastily written these commentaries, either at the close of each day, or else very soon after
Digitized by v^ooQleDigitized by Google














Digitized by Go eNOTES TO
CAESAR’S COMMENTARIES
ON
THE WAR IN GAUL.
C. Julii Casaris, &c.	“ Caius Julius Caesar’s Commentaries ]
on the War in Gaul.” By commentaries are to be here understood brief narratives of events, composed in a plain, unambitious style, and the principal object of which is to preserve the remembrance of events for.the benefit of those who may subsequently wish to compose fuller and more elaborate works. Thus Hirtius, in the epistle prefixed to the eighth book of the Gallic War, remarks, “ Casaris commentarii editi sunt, ne scientia tantarum rerum scriptoribus decs set” Hence the term appears somewhat analogous to our modem expression “ memoirs.” The corresponding Greek forms are birofivtjpaTa, birojivTuuiTLopoi, and iirofjLVTjfiovevfiara. Hence Strabo, in speaking of Caesar’s commentaries, has, *0 Kaiaap h roig Ixofivfifxacn (4, p. 117, ed. Casaub.); and hence also the memoirs of Socrates, hy his pupil Xenophon, are entitled XuKpdrovs irouvrmovevpaTa. Plutarch (Vit. Cas. c. 22) speaks of a work of Caesar’s called and it has been made a matter of discussion whether this was the same with the commentaries that we now have, or a distinct production. Rualdus (ad. Plut. Vit. Cas. c. 22.—Op. ed. Reiske, vol. iv., p. 858, seq.) maintains the latter opinion, on the ground that the ancient writers everywhere quote, from the Ephemerides, passages not to be found in the commentaries. This opinion has found many advocates. On the other hand, Fabricius (Bill.
Lai. 1, 10, 2) contends that there are many lacuna in the books of Caesar on the Gallic war, as they have come down to our time The subject will be resumed in me “ Life of Caesar.”
XJ 2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Gallia eat omnis, 6cc. “ All Gaul is divided into three parta." Cssar here means by “ Gaul*’ that part which had not yet been subdued by the Romans. The latter had already reduced the Allobroges in the south, and had formed in that quarter what was called “ Gallia Provincia,” or “ Gallia Narbonensis,” or, as is the ca*»e in these commentaries, simply “ Provincia.*’ Consult Geograplii cal Index.
Quarum. Supply parttum.
Tertiam, qui, 6cc. “ The third, they who are called in then own language Celtae, in ours Galli.” The order of construction is, (ii) qui appellantur Celtce ipsorum lingua, Galli nostra (lingua, incolunt) tertiam (partem).
Celtce. The Celtae mark the parent stem, or genuine Gallic race. From the extent of their territory, the Greeks gave the whole country of Gaul the name of lUXrutb {Celtica). Among the earlier Greeks, the whole of western Europe, at some distance from the shores of the Mediterranean, went by the appellation of the “ Celtic land,” xty** KeXriicii. (Scymn. Ch. v., 166.) Consult Geographical Index. The term Galli is only “ Gael” Latinized.
Lingua. This is not correct as regards the Beige and Celtae, who merely spoke two different dialects of the same tongue, the former being of the Cymric, the latter of the Gallic stock. The Aquitani, however, would appear to have belonged to the Iberian race, and to have spoken a language of Iberian origin. (Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. i., Introd. p. xii., seq.)
Institutis. “ In customs.”—Inter se. “ From one another.’* Literally, “ among themselves.”
Gallos ab Aquitanis, 6cc. “ The river Garumna separates the Galli from the Aquitani, the Matrona and Sequana divide them from the Belgae.” With Jlumen supply dividit. The student will note, that the singular verb dividit follows after the two nominatives Matrona and Sequana, as referring to one continuous boundary, and to the circumstance also of the Matrona being only a tributary of the Sequana.
Fortissimi sunt Belgae. The same idea is expressed in Tacitus, Hist. 4, 76.—A cultu atque humanitate Provinciae. 11 From the civilization and intellectual refinement of the province. ’* Cultus refers here to the mode of life, humanitas to mental improvement and culture; and hence cultus is given by Oberlinus, in his Index latinitatis, as “ vitae ratio, ab omni ruditate remota.” The civilization and refinement of the Roman province was principally derived from the Greek city of Massilia, now Marseilles. (Justin, 43, 4.>
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Minime sape commeant. 44 Least frequently resort,,T i. e., very 3 seldom penetrate to these distant regions.—Ad effeminandos ani-, mos. 44 To enervate their minds,” i. e., break down their warlike spirit.
Proxvmique sunt Germains. “ And because they are nearest to the Germans,” i. e., are in their immediate neighbourhood. According to the punctuation which we have adopted, this is the corresponding clause to the one beginning with propterea quod.
Helvetii quoque. Because they also dwell near the Germans.
Cum. 44 On which occasions.” — Eos. Referring to the Germans.—Autipsi, &,c. 44 Or else they themselves carry on war in the territories of the latter.” Ipsi refers to the Helvetii.
Eorum una pars. 44 One part of these main divisions of Gaul.” Eorum refers back to Hi omnes, or, in other words, to the Belgae, Celt®, and Aquitani. As, however, the idea of territory is necessarily involved, we may, in order to adapt the phrase to our idiom, translate as if there were an ellipsis of finium, though, in reality, none such is to be supplied. As regards the remote reference which sometimes occurs in the case of Ate and is, consult Perizomus, ad Sanct. Min. 2, 9 (vol. i., p. 276, ed. Bauer), where the present passage comes under review.
Obtinere. 44 Possess.” Obtineo is here used in its primitive
and genuine sense, 44 to hold against others,” i. e., 44 to possess” or “ enjoy.” — Initium capit, &c.	44	Commences	at the river
Rhone.” Literally, 44 takes its beginning from the river Rhone.”
Continetur. 44 Is bounded.” Literally, 44 is encompassed”
or 44 hemmed in.”—Attingit etiam, &c.	44	It	touches also on the
Rhine in the quarter of the Sequani and Helvetii.” More literally,
44 on the side of the Sequani and Helvetii,” i. e., where these two communities dwell.
Vergit ad septentriones. 44 It stretches away towards the north.” Literally, 44 it inclines” or 44 tends towards the north,”
\. e., from its point of commencement on the Rhodanus.
Ab extremis Gallia finibus. 44 From the farthest confines of Gaul.” By Gaul is here meant the middle division of the country, or that occupied by the Celt®, who have been mentioned in the preceding sentence under the name of Galli. By fines extremi Cssar means the boundaries most remote from Rome, or, in other words, the northern.
Spectant in septentriones, <kc. 44 They look towaids the north and the rising sun,” i. e., their country, commencing on tb?
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK
Page.
3 northern borders of Celtica, faces, or stretches away to the norto and east.
Et earn partem Oceani, <fcc. “ And that part of the Atlantic Ocean which is next to Spain,” i. e., in the immediate vicinity of Spain, and washing its northern coast. The reference is to the lower part of the Bay of Biscay. As regards the force of ad in this passage, compare the common form of expression esse ad urbem, “ to be near the city,” and Cicero (Ep. ad Fam. 15, 2), Castra ad Cybistra locavi. “ I pitched my camp in the neighbourhood of Cybistra.”
Spectat inter, &c. “ It looks between the setting of the sun and the north,” i. e., it looks northwest; it faces towards that point. Moms thinks we ought to read in for inter; but the Greek paraphrase sanctions the common lection : ifop$ Si r& furafy "Apjcrwi» re
. *a2 ’AfaroXdv.
"13. Orgetorix. This name is said by Celtic scholars to mean Hchief of a hundred hills,” from or, “a hill,” ced, “ a hundred,” and righ, " a chief.” (Compare Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. ii., I*. *89)
Marco Messala, &c.	“	Marcus	Messala	and Marcus Pise
being consuls,” i. e., in the consulship of Marcus Messala and Marcus Piso. Supply existentibus. The date is A. U. C. 693, B. C. 61.
Regni cupiditate inductus. “ Led on by a desire of enjoying the chief authority.” Regni is to be here regarded as equivalent to regnandi.—Nobilitatis. The higher class of chieftains are meant.
Civitati. “His state,” i. e., the people. By civitas are here meant all the inhabitants of a district or state, under one and the same government. This usage is very frequent in our author.
De finibus suis. “From their territories.” Fines, in the sense of “territories” or “country,” is of very common occur rence in Caesar.
Imperio potiri. “ To possess themselves of the sovereignty,”
e., to rule as masters over the other Gallic tribes.
Id hoc facilius, &c.	“	He	persuaded	them to that step the
more easily on this account.” The order is, persuasit id eis facilius hoc.— Undique loci natura continentur. “Are confined on al, sides by the nature of their situation,” i. e., are kept in, are prevented from wandering far.
Monte Jura. The name, in Celtic, is said to mean “ the domain of God,” from Jou, an appellation for the Deity, and rag, the domain of a chieftain or ruler. The term appears a very appropriate
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE fTUST HOOK.
one to be applied by a barbarous people to a lofty mountain-range. ^ Consult Geographical Index.
Lacu Lemanno. Now the Lake of Geneva. Strabo gives the form Atpiwa, the Greek paraphrast Aepdvos.
Minus late. “ Less widely,” i. e., than they could have w shed.—Homines bellandi cupidi. “ Men (like themselves) fond of warfare.”
Pro multitudine, &c.	“	They	thought, besides, that they
possessed narrow territories, considering the extent of their popula tion, and their high character for war and bravery.” More literally,
“ narrow territories, in proportion to the number of inhabitants,” <fcc.
Qui in longitudinem, &c. “ Which extended in length,” &c. Cluverius condemns the inaccuracy of this measurement, both as regards length and breadth. (Germ. 2, 4 ) But we must bear in mind that Caesar, when he wrote this, had never been in the. land of the Helvetii, and followed, therefore, merely the rude estimate furnished him by some of that nation. Caesar makes Jhe length qf Helvetia forty-eight geographical miles; the true distance, however, from Geneva to the Lake of Constance, is only forty. (Marinfjb vol. ii., p. 214.)
1. His rebus adducti. “ Induced by these considerations.”—Ad ^ proficiscendum. “ To their departure.”
2 Carrorum. “ Of wagons.” This term has two forms for the nominative, carrus and carrum. Caesar employs the former, and the author of the commentaries on the Spanish war the latter (c.
6). The word is of Celtic origin, and denotes a kind of four- wheeled wagon. Compare the German Karre. In later Latinity the neuter form prevailed. (Adelung, Gloss. Med. et Inf. LaL voL
, p. 231.)
Sementes quam maximas facere. “ To make as extensive sowings as possible,” i. e., to sow as much land as possible.
In tertium annum, &c.	“ They fix upon their departure for
the third year by a law,” i. e., they fix upon the third year for their departure. The term lege is here employed as denoting merely the assent of the general assembly of the nation to the proposition of Orgetorix. It is analogous, therefore, in the present instance, to decreto.
Ad eas res confidendas. The repetition of this phrase here is extremely inelegant, though it may be cited as one proof, among others that might be adduced, of Caesar’s having hastily written these commentaries, either at the close of each day, or else very soon after
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
the occurrences detailed in them. Oberlinus suggests ad ea ji place of ad eas res conjiciendas; but the emendation, though neat, rests on no MSS. authority.
6 Regnum obtinuerat. “Had enjoyed the sovereign power.” (Compare note 6, p. 3.) The sovereign authority was not generally hereditary among the Gallic tribes, but was conferred by the peofle on the one whom they judged most worthy.
A senatu Populi Romani. “ By the senate of the Roman people,” i. e., by the senate of Rome. We have here adopted the reading of the oldest and best MSS. The copyists have been misled by the common form, S. P. Q. R., i. e., senatu populoque Romano,, and have introduced it here, where it does not at all apply, for the title of “ amicus” was conferred by the senate, not by the people. Compare book 4, c. 12, “ amicus ab senatu nostro appellatus” and 7, 31, “ cujus paler ab senatu nostro amicus erat appellatus.”
Occuparet. The student will observe that the leading verb is
in the present tense, persuadet, and yet the verb following is in the piL«t tense, occuparet. The rule that operates in such cases is given as follows by Zumpt, L. G. p. 322.	“ When an historian
uses the present for the perfect aorist, to transport his reader back to the time of which he is speaking, he often joins an imperfect with this present, which in sense is past.”
Principatum obtinebat. “Enjoyed the chief authority.” The phrase principatum obtinere applies to one who is the leader of his countrymen, but without the name of king. Thus we have in Lactantius, de fads. rel. 1, 13, “ Primus Uranus eminere inter cateros potentia coeperit, et principatum haberet non regnum”
Perfacile factu esse, &c. “He proves unto them that it was a very easy matter to accomplish their designs,” i. e., that the accomplishment of their intended designs would be a very easy matter.
Quin totius GaUiaef &c.	“	But that the Helvetii could do
the most of all Gaul,” i. e., were the most powerful state of all Gaul.
Illis regna conciliaturum. “ Would gain for them the sovereignty in their respective states.”
 Ety regno occupato, &c. “ And they entertain the hope, that, if the sovereign power be seized by each of them, they can make diemselves masters of all Gaul, by means of its three most powerful and valiant communities.” The three communities hero re-
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
terred to are the Helvetii, Sequani, and Aedui, and the intended 4 change is to be brought about after Orgetorix, Casticus, and Duih- norix shall have seized upon the sovereign power in their respective states.
Firmissimos. Some of the early editions read fortissimos, but it is a mere gloss, explanatory of firmissimos.
Totius Gallia potiri. The verb potiri governs the genitive or ablative. Cicero, whenever he employs it to express the acquisi tion of sovereignty or political power, uniformly joins it with a genitive. Caesar, on the other hand, sometimes employs the genitive, as in the present instance, and sometimes, as in chap. 2, joins the verb to the ablative of imperium.
Ea res. “ This design.”—Per indicium. “ Through in formers.” Literally, “ by a disclosure” or “ information.”
Moribus suis. “According to their custom.” Referring 10 the established usage of the nation in such cases.—Ex vinculis causam dicere. “ To plead his cause in chains,” i. e., to answer the charge in chains. Ex vinculis, literally, “ out of chains,” i. e.,
“ from the midst of chains,” encompassed all the time by them.
Damnatum panam, &c. The order is, oportebal pcenam, ut cremaretur igni, sequi (eum) damnatum. “ It behooved the punishment, that he should be burnt by fire, to attend him if con demned.” More freely, “ His punishment, in case he were con demned, was to be burnt to death.” Urere is simply “to burn,” but cremare, “ to bum to ashes.” The punishment here mentioned was usual among the Gauls and other barbarous nations in cases of high treason.
Causa dictionis. “ For the pleading of his case.” Dictio causa is generally applied to the defendant in a cause, and means a full explanation and defence of his conduct.—Ad judicium. “To the trial.”
Omnem suam familiam. “All his household.” The reference is to his domestics, and all the individuals employed about his private affairs. Familia, in its primitive acceptation, denotes all the slaves belonging to one master.
Obceralos. “Debtors.” The term obceratus properly denotes one who, being in debt to another, is compelled to serve the latter, and in this way discharge the debt by his labour and services. Compare Varro, L. L. 6, “ Liber, qui suas operas 1« servitute, pro pecuma, quam debeat, dat; dum solveret, nexus vocatur, et ab are obaratus
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON TUS FIRST BOOK.
Eodem. “ To the same place/* i. e., the place of trial.—
Per eos, ne causam dicere. &c.	“	By	their	means	he	rescues
himself from the necessity of pleading his cause.** More literally, “ he rescued Lamself, so that he should not plead his cause.** His slave* Uji retainers rescued him out of the bands of his judges.
Incitata. “Incensed.” More literally, “aroused.”—Jus suum exsequi. “ To enforce their authority.” Literally, “ to follow out their authority,” i. e., to carry it onward to its destined end, namely, the punishment of Orgetorix.
Magistratus. “ The magistrates,” i. e., of the Helvetii.— Cogerent. “ Were collecting.” More literally, “ were compelling the attendance.**
. 25. Quin ipse sibi, dec. “ But that he laid violent hands on himself.” Literally, “ but that he resolved on death against himself.’*
Oppida sua omnia, dec. Plutarch mentions the same circum
stance.	(Vit.	Cces. c. 18.)—Prater quod. Elegantly put for
prater id quod. “ Except what.”
Domum reditionis. “ Of a return home.” This is commonly cited as an instance of a verbal noun governing the accusative, according to the rules of earlier Latinity. Domum, however, is here construed like the name of a town. A better example of the accusative, governed by a verbal noun, may be obtained from Plautus (Amph. 1, 3, 21), “ Quid tibi curatio cst hanc remV’
Trium mensium, dec. “ Ground provisions for three months/* i e., meal or flour. The Greek paraphrast employs the term £X<pira.
Eodem usi concilio. “ Having adopted the same desigu,” i. e., having formed the same resolution of leaving home.
Trans Rhenum. On the banks of the Saavus and Danube, where they continued to dwell for about 130 years. This country on their leaving it, took the name of Deserta Boiorum. (PUn. H N. 3, 27.)
Receptos ad se, &c.	“ They receive, and unite to themselves
as confederates.” A participle and verb, in such constructions, axe to be translated as two verbs with the connective conjunction. — 7. Quibus itineribus. The noun to which the relative refers is sometimes, as in the present instance, repeated after it, especially in CaBsar. It appears to have been the style of legal documents. (Zumpt, L. G. p. 237.)
8. Yix qua, dec. Supply parte after qua. “ Along which a single wagon could with difficulty be led at a time.” The student
Digitized by GoogleVOTB8 ON I*HJB FIRST BOOK.
will note the use of qua parte in the feminine, although the neuter gender, urtum (iter), precedes. Instances of this are far from unfrequent. Thus, Cic. pro Cctdn. c. 8, “ Ad omnes introitus, qua adiri poterit.”—Cats. B. G. 5,44, “ Per Alpes, qua proximum iter trot” &c.
Ut. “ So that.”— ProJubere possent.	“	Could	prevent a
passage.”
Provinciam nostram. “ Our province.” Referring to the Roman province in the south of Gaul. Consult Geographical Index.—Expeditius. “ Readier,” i. e., containing fewer difficulties and im}>edunent8.
Allobrogum, qui nuper pacati erant. They had been sub dued by Caius Pomptinius, the praetor, and their territory now formed part of the Roman province. Adelung makes the name Allobroges denote “highlanders,” from Al, “high,” and Broga, “land.” (.Mithridates, vol. ii., p. 60.) With this O’Brien nearly agrees in his Irish-English Dictionary, deducing the term from Axil, “ a rock,” and Brog, “ a habitation.”
Vado transitur. “ Is crossed by a ford,” i. e., is fordable.
Ex to oppido. “ From this town a bridge extends across to the Helvetii.” The bridge began, in fact, a little below the town. —Some translate 'pertinet “ belongs,” which is altogether erroneous. The Greek paraphrast gives the true idea: 'Af lit (Ttvtat) ecu yi<Pvpa fit rt)v 'E\6t)tik?iv Sifaei.
Bono animo. “ Of a friendly mind,” i. e., well disposed.
16. Diem dicunt. “ They appoint a day.” More literally, “ they
name a day.”—Qua die. Consult note 7.—Omnes conveniant “ All are to assemble.”
Is dies. The student will note the change from the feminine qua die to the masculine form. The common rule, that dies is masculine when it is spoken of a particular or specified day ; but feminine when referring to duration of time, is not sufficiently exact: exceptions may be found to it in many writers. (Zumpt, L. G. p. 41.)
Ante diem quintum, &c.	“	The	fifth	before	the	Kalends of
April.” This answered to the 28th of March, the Kalends of April aeing the first of that month. It must be remembered that the Romans, in computing their time, always included the day from vhich, and also the day to which, they reckoned. In this way the i8th of March became the 5th before the Kalends of the ensuing nonth Consult the article Kalendae, in the Archeological Index
X
Digitized by CiOOQleNOTE8 ON THE FIR8T BOOK.
5 As regards the phrase ante diem quintum Kalendae, it may be remarked, that the expression is idiomatic for die quinto ante Ka Unda».
Lucio Pisone, &c. A. U. C. 090, B. C. 68.
Ah urbe, “From the city,” i. e., from Rome. Caesar, previously to the expiration of his consulship, had obtained from the people, through the tribune Vatinius, the provinces of Gallia Cisalpina and Illyricum, with three legions, for five years ; and the senate added Gallia Transalpina, with another legion. He set out from the city, as appears from the context, in the early part of the spring.
Quam maximis potest itineribus. “ By as great journeys as
possible,” i. e., with all possible speed. Compare the Greek par- aphrast, u>;	rdyiartt.
Galliam ulteriorem. “Farther Gaul,” i. e., Gaul beyond the Alps, or Gallia Transalpina.
Provincia toti, &c. “He orders as many soldiers as possible from the whole province,” i. e., commands the whole province to furnish as many soldiers as it could. Literally, “ he commands to the whole province as many,” &c.
 Omnino. “ In all.”—I^egio una. “ But a single legion.” The legion, in the time of Polybius, contained 4200 men, to whom were added 300 horse. Lipsius thinks that Caesar’s legions did not much exceed this estimate. (De Mil. Rom. lib. 1, dial. 5.) Consult remarks under the article legio, in the Archaeological Index.
g 1. Ad Genevam. “Near Geneva.” So Roma means “in Rome,” but ad Romam, “ near Rome.”
Certiores facti sunt. “Were informed.” The adjective certus has frequently the meaning of “ sure,” “ well acquainted,” <fcc. Thus, fac me, oro, ut sim certus, an. “ Inform me, I entreat, for a certainty, whether;” and again, certi sumus, te hoc fecisse, “ we know well that you did this.” Hence arises the phrase, “ certiorem fodere, “ to inform,” “ to make acquainted,” as referring to information on which reliance may generally be placed.
Principem locum obtinebant. “ Held the chief place,” i. e., they were at the head of the embassy. Compare note 9, page 4. —Verudoctius. This name is derived,''by Celtic scholars, from vcr9 “ a man,” and dacht, or docht, “ speech,” as indicating a public speaker or orator ; and, though given by Csesar as a proper name, may have been only, in fact, an appellation for one of the leaders of the embassy. (Thierry, Hist, dcs Gaulois, vol. ii, p. 297.)
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOR.
Sibi esse in animo. “That it was their intention.,,—Sine ullo maleficio. “Without doing any harm.” — Ejus voluntate. —With his consent.”
Occisum. Supply fuisse, and so also after pulsum and miss wm. The event alluded to in the text had taken place forty-nine years previous. A Cimbro-Teutonic horde, the same that were afterward defeated by Marius, after devastating central Gaul, united with the Helvetii, and resolved to attack the Roman province simultaneously at different points. The Tigurini, a tribe of the Helvetii, under the command of Divico, undertook to invade the territory of the Allobroges by the bridge of Geneva and the fords of the Rhone a little below this city. The rest of the Helvetii, together with their new allies, moved south. This plan of operations compelled the Romans to divide their forces. The Consul Cassius hastened to Geneva, while his lieutenant Scaurus made head against the Cimbri and Teutones. Both commanders were unfortunate. Cassius and his army were cut to pieces by the Helvetii on the borders of the Lacus Lemannus, or Lake of Geneva; while Scaurus was defeated and taken prisoner by those whom he had endeavoured to oppose. Liv. Epit. 65.—Oros. 5, 15.—Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. ii., p. 200, seq.
Sub jugum missum. “ Sent under the yoke.” Two spears were placed upright in the ground, and a third one was laid across them at top, forming what the Romans called jugum• Under this, they who were admitted to surrender upon these terms were compelled to pass without their arms.
Data facultate. “ If an opportunity were afforded them.”—
Temperaturos ab injuria», &c.	“ Would refrain from injury and
outrage.” Literally, “would restrain themselves.” Supply se after temperaturos.
Ut spatium intercedare posset. “ In order that some space of time might intervene.”—Diem sumturum. “ That he would take time.” Dies is here put, not for the natural day, but for an indefinite period of time. Compare Davies, ad loc.
Ante diem, &c.	“ On the day before the Ides of April.” The
Ides of April fell on the 13th of that month. The date here meant is consequently the 12th. As regards the idiomatic expression ante item, compare note 17, page 5. Consult also, for remarks on th Roman month, the article Kalendce, in the Archaeological Index.
Qui in flumen, &c. The Rhone actually flows into the Lake ol Geneva • Vmt flsnwar. heincr unacouainted with the country above
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
*
g the lake, imagined that the lake Bowed into or formed the river There is no need, therefore, of the emendation adopted by some editors, who read quem in flumen Rhodanum influit, i. e., " into which the river Rhone flews.” Besides, flumen Rhodanum, making Rhodbnum an adjective, agreeing with flumen, is not in Caesar’s usual style.
Ad montem Juram. It will be remembered that there were only two ways by which the Helvetii could leave home; one by the fords of the Rhone into the Roman province; the other by the narrow pass between Mount Jura and the Rhone, and which led through the territories of the Sequani. Of these two, that which ed into the province most required the attention of CiBsar; and as he could not expect to keep off the vast numbers of the Helvetii by the small force which he had with him, he drew a wall along the lower bank of the Rhone, in a line with the fords, from the point where the Lake of Geneva emptied into that river, to the spot where the Rhone divides, as it were, the chain of Jura into two parts, and forms the pass already mentioned between the river and the mountain. This narrow passage, moreover, would only lead the Helvetii into the territory of the Sequani ; whereas the other, by the foTds of the Rhone, would have carried them at once into the Roman province. Consult the plan at page 7 of the Latin text.
Millia passuum decem novem. “ Nineteen miles in length.** Literally, “ nineteen thousand paces.** The Roman passus, or “pace,” was 1 yard, 1.85375 ft.; and as 1000 of them went to the milliare, or “ mile,” the latter was equivalent to 1617 yds. 2.75 ft. We have given the reading of all the early editions. Vossius, regarding the length of the wall as too great, omits novem, entirely on his own authority, and is followed by many subsequent editors. But the Greek paraphrast has ixardv xai irtvrf/Kovra ito trrdiia, which favours the reading decem novem. Besides, what prevents our supposing that the wall was carried on until it reached some part of the chain of Jura, and had passed beyond all the fords 1
Castella communit. “He carefully fortifies redoubts.”
Communire is equivalent to valde munire.—Se invito.	“ Against
his wiL.” Literally, “ he himself being unwilling.’*
Quam constituerat. “ Which he had appointed.” The allusion is to the day before the Ides.
Negat, se more, &c. “He declares that he cannot, consistently with the usage and example of the Roman people,” &c., L
., that it was an unusual and unprecedented thini? for the Roman
GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Face
people to grant any one a passage through their province.—Exem-	(j
plum refers to the behaviour of the Romans on similar occasions.
Ostendit. “He shows them plainly,” i. e., he explicitly declares.—Ea spe dejectu “ Disappointed in this hope.” Literally,
“ cast down from this hope.”
Navibus junctis, &c.	“	Some	by	means	of boats connected
together, and numerous rafts constructed for the purpose,” i. e., some by a bridge of boats and by numerous rafts, &c. Before nor vibus we must understand alii. The common text has it expressed after factis.
Qua minima, &c. “ Where the depth of the river was least.”
—Si perrumpere possent. “ If they could.force a passage.”—Operis munitione. “ By the strength of our works.” Alluding to the wall which had been constructed between the lake and Jura, together with its ditch and numerous redoubts.
Propter angustias. “ On account of the narrowness of the pass.”—Sua sponte. “ Of themselves,” i. e., by their own application.
Ut eo deprecatore, &c. “In order that, he being the inter- 7 cessor, they might obtain what they wished from the Sequani,” i,
e., through his intervention or mediation. With impetrarent supply hoc, as referring to the passage through their territories. The com* mon text has hoc expressed.
Gratia et larj&tione, &c. “By his personal influence and liberality could accomplish a very great deal among the Sequani.”
With poterat supply facere.
Jn matrimonium duxerat. “ Had married.” Literally, “bad led into matrimony.” The Romans said ducere uxorem, “ to marry a wife,” because the female was conducted, as a part of the eere- mony, from her father’s house to that of her husband. Hence dvr cere uxorem is for ducere uxorem domum, literally, “ to lead a wife home.” So again, in speaking of a female taking a husband, the Latin writers employ the verb nubo. Thus nubere viro, “ to marry a husband.” Here the ellipsis is nubere se viro, literally, “ to veil herself for a husband,” alluding to the bride’s wearing a flame- coloured veil during the marriage ceremony.
Novis rebus studebat. “ Was aiming at a change in the gov eminent,” i. e., was plotting a revolution in the state. Literally,
“ was desirous of new things.”
Suo sibi beneficio obstrictas. “ Firmly attached to himself oy reason of his kind offices towards them.” He wished to have
X 2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
7 these states under strong obligations to himself, in order that they might aid him in his ambitious designs.
Rem. “ The affair,” i. e., the negotiation.— Dent. Referring to both parties, the Helvetii and Sequani.—Sequani, ne,6cc. 44 The Sequani, not to prevent the Helvetii from using this route,” i. e.t the Sequani, to give hostages not to prevent, &c.
Casari rmunciatur. “Word is brought to Caesar.” Re- nunciare is properly applied to intelligence, that is brought to one who had been previously expecting something of the kind ; and it is therefore the very term that is required here. Compare the remark of Forcellini: 44 Renunciare proprie adhibetur, cum nunctum alicujus rex exspectanti afferimus.”
Qua civitas. 44 Which state.” Referring to the Tolosates.
Id si fieret, &c.	44	Should	this	be	done,	he clearly saw it
would be attended with great danger to the province, that it should have for neighbours a warlike race,” &c., i. e., for it to have in its immediate vicinity a warlike race of men. The race alluded to are the Helvetii.
Locis patentibus, &c.	44 In an open and very fertile tract
of country.”
Ei munitioni. Referring to the wall that had been con structed between the lake and Mount Jura. — Legatum. 44 His lieutenant.” The number of legati, or lieutenants-general, depended on the importance of the war.
In Italiam. 44 Into Italy,” i. e., into Hither, or Cisalpine Gaul. Compare chap. 24, where the two legions here mentioned are said to have been levied 44 in Gallia citeriore.”—Magnis itiner ibus. 44 By great journeys.”
Qua proximum iter. 44 Where the route was nearest,” i. e.f shortest. With qua supply parte. Thus, Martial, 3, 91, 5, 44 Qua parte cubaret, quarunt,” and again, 7, 73, 5, 44 Die qua te parte requiram.” (Palairet, EUips. Lai. p. 140, ed. Barker.)
Compluribus his praliis pulsis. 44 These having been routed In numerous encounters.” Polyaenus (8, 23) makes mention of a stratagem employed by Caesar against these mountaineers. Under cover of the morning mist, he led a portion of his forces by a circuitous route to a part of the mountain which overhung the enemy’s position. On a sudden a shout was raised by those with him, and was answered by the rest of his troops below, on which the barbarians, struck with terror, betook themselves to hasty flight. What Polyaenus adds, however, that Caesar crossed the Alps on this oc-NOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
casion, without any fighting (Kaioap	rig	"AX-ntig	brep&aXtv),
appears from the present passage to be incorrect.
Citerioris Provincia. 44 Of the hither province.” By citerior provincia the Romans meant Cisalpine Gaul; by ulterior pro- mncidi Transalpine. Both epithets were used with reference to Rome.—Extremum. Supply oppidum.
Rogatum auxilium. Supply dicentes. 44 Stating.”—Ita se
omni tempore, &c.	44	That they had so deserved at &1. times of the
Roman people, that their fields ought not to be ravaged,” See., i. e., that, on account of their constant fidelity to the Romans, they did not deserve to have their fields ravaged, dtc.
Necessarii et consanguinei. 44 The friends and relations of the Aedui.” By necessarii, among the Roman writers, those are meant to whom kind offices are, as it were necessarily, due, either on account of friendship or kindred.
Demonstrant. 44 Inform him.” Equivalent here and else
where to narrant.—Sibi prater agri, &c.	44	That nothing was left
them except the soil of their land,” i. e., except the bare soil, except a devastated country. The genitive reliqui depends on nihil.
Omnibus fortunis sociorum consumtis. 44 All the resources of his allies having been destroyed,” i. e., their fortunes having become completely ruined.
Santonos. The MSS. vary between Santones and Santonos, but the better class have Santonos. Both forms are in use. In the same way we have Teutoni and Teutones. Compare Cortius, ad Lucant 1, 422, 44 Gaudetque amoto Santonus hoste.”
Flumen est Arar. “There is a river called Arar.” Now the Same. Consult Geographical Index.
Incredibili lenitate. 44 With wonderful smoothness.” Moro literally, “with a smoothness exceeding belief.”—Iudicari non possit. 44 It cannot be determined.”
Id transibant. 44 Were now in the act of crossing it.”—Lin tribus. 44 Small boats.” These were formed of trees hollowed out. Compare Virgil, Georg. 1, 266, “ Cavat arbore lintres.” The Greeks called them fiovd^vXoi. {Veget. 3, 7.) Compare also Livy (31, 26), “ Novasque alias primum Galliy inchoantes, cava bant ex singulis arboribux.”
Tree jam copiarum partes, dec. 44 That the Helvetii had by this time conveyed three parts of their forces across this river,” i. e., three fourths of their whole force. Partes is governed by duxisse in composition ani flumen by trans. So the passive voice trans
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOQ*.
duci may take an accusative, which, in reality, however, de]iends upon trans. Thu* Belga Rhenum antiquitus traducti. (Zumpt; L. G. p. 260.)
Djt tenia vigilia. “ At the beginning of the third watch.” i. e., at midnight. The Romans divided the night into four watches, pach of three hours. The first began at six o’clock in the evening, according to our mode of computing time; the second at nine o’clock; the third at midnight; the fourth at three o’clock in the morning.
Impeditos et inopinantes. “ Encumbered with their baggage, and not expecting him.”—Aggressus. Plutarch (Vit. Cces. 18) says that it was Labienus who attacked the Helvetii on this occasion ; but, according to Caesar’s account, which, of course, is to be preferred, Labienus had been left in charge of the works along the Rhone. Compare chap. 10.
Is pagus appellal/atur Tigurinus. “ This canton was called the Tigurine,” i. e., that of the Tigurini. Pagus here takes the place of pars, which had been previously used in speaking of this division of the Helvetii. For the etymology of pagus, consult Blomfield, Gloss, in Prom. Vinct. v. 20, p. 106.
12 In quatuor pagos. Cellarius gives these four cantons as follows : Tigurinus, Urbigenus, Ambrunicus, and Tugenus. The first two we obtain from Caesar, the remainder from Eutropius, Orosius, and Strabo. The only one of the four which is at all doubtful is that styled pagus Ambronicus, since the Ambrones were of German origin. (Cellarius, Geog. Antiq. vol. i., p. 222. —Mannert, vol. ii., p. 215.)
Hic pagus unus. “ This particular canton.”—Lucium Cas sium consulem. Consult note 5, page 6.
Consilio deorum immortalium. “In accordance with the counsels of the immortal gods,” i. e., by their special providence.
Princeps poenas persolvit. “ Was the first to suffer punishment. Comparo chap. 41 of this book, “ Princepsquc decima legio per tribunos militum ei gratias egit.”
Quod ejus soceri, &c.	“	Because	the	Tigurini,	in	the	sime
battle in which they had slain Cassius, had also slain his lieutenant, Lucius Piso, the grandfather of Lucius Piso, Caesar’s father-in-law.” Cwsar, after having been divorced from Pompeia, whose character had suffered in the affair of Clodius and his violation of the rites ol the Bona Dea, took, as a second wife, Calpurnia, the daughter ol Lucius Calpurnius Piso, and procured the consulship the next year
Digitized by GoogleN0TU8 ON THU FIRST BOOK.
or his father-in-law, he himself having held it the year preceding, y Sutton. Vit. Cos. 21.—Plvt. Vit. Cas. 14.
Consequi. “ To overtake.”—r/n Arare. “ Over the Arar.”
Cum id, &c. “ When they perceived that he had effected in y a single day what they themselves had with very great difficulty accomplished in twenty days, namely, the crossing of the river.”
'iJ-iterally, “ namely, that they might cross the river.” Ciacconius - tUlnks that the words ut flumen transirent are a gloss, and not Cae- v sar’s.—in this he is clearly wrong, as they appear to have been added by Caesar for the sake of perspicuity.
Cujus legationisy &c.	“ At the head of which embassy was
Divico.”—Dux Helvetiorum. Compare note 5, page 6.—Bello Cassiano. “ In the war with Cassius,” i. e., in the war in which Cassius was the commander opposed to them.
Cum Casare agit. “Treats with Caesar,” i. e., addresses Caesar. Compare the Greek paraphrast, roi&fo.
Atque ibi futuros. “And would remain there.” Compare the Greek paraphrast, xai Uet fuvovmv.
Veteris incommodi. “ The old overthrow.” Alluding to the defeat of Cassius.—Helvetiorum. Referring in particular to the Tigurini, who defeated Cassius.
Quod improvisoy &c.	“	As	to	his	having	surprised	one	of
their cantons.”—Ne ob earn remy &c.	“	He	should	not,	on	that
account, ascribe anything too highly to his own valour, or greatly despise them,” i. e., “ he should not attribute the defeat of the Helvetii altogether to his own valour, nor look down with contempt on them.” With tribueret supply quidquam.
Quam dolo. The common text has contenderent following after dolo. We have rejected it as a mere gloss, in which light i* is also viewed by Gruter, Davies, and Oudendorp. Bentley recom mends niterentur et contenderent.
Ne committeret. “ He should not bring it to pass.” Mors freely, “ he should not cause.”—Aut memoriam proderet. “ Or should transmit the remembrance of such an event to posterity.”
The conclusion of this speech is in full accordance with the boastful and arrogant character ascribed to the Gauls by ancient writers
Eo sibi minus, &c/ “That he felt the less hesitation as to the course he was to pursue, because he well remembered,” &c Literally, “that less doubt was given him on this account, because,”
&c. C®sar means that the very circumstances which the Helvetii had mentioned for the purpose of intimidating him had only in
Digitized by GoogleNOTE 8^ ON THE FIR8T BOOK.
duced him to make up his mind more promptly on the question, whether he would conclude a peace with them or go on with the war. For that the defeat of Cassius had happened undeservedly to the Romans, and he was resolved to avenge it.
Atque eo gravius ferre, &c.	“	And	that	he	felt	the	more
indignant at them, the less they had happened in accordance with the deserts of the Roman people,” i. e., that he resented them the more strongly, as they had happened undeservedly to his countrymen.—Eo gravius ferre. Literally, “ that he bore them the more heavily.”
Qui si alicujus, &c. The relative qui has here Populi Romani for its antecedent. “ For that, had they been conscious to themselves of having done any previous injury to the Helvetii, it would not have been difficult for them to be on their guard against the latter; but that they were misled by this, because they were not aware that anything had been done by them on account of which they should fear; nor, on the other hand, did they think they ought to fear without cause.” Caesar means, that the Romans, on the occasion alluded to, were rather surprised than defeated by the Helvetii. For they were not conscious of ever having wronged that people, and, of course, expected no danger from them, and had made no preparations to oppose them.
Quod si. “ Even if, however.” — Vetens contumelia.
“ Their former insult,” i. eTTthe affront put by them upon the Roman name in the overthrow of Cassius.—Num etiam, &c.	“	Could
he also lay aside the remembrance of recent injuries 1” The order is, num etiam posse deponere memoriam recentium injuriarum 1
Quod tentassent. “ In that they had attempted.” More freely, “ in their having attempted.”—Quod gloriarentur. ‘‘That, as to their boasting.”—Quodque admirarentur. “ And as to their wondering.”—Eodem pertinere. “ Both of these things tended to the same effect.” Were of a similar tendency, i. e., only tended the more surely to provoke his anger.
Quo gravius homines, &c.	“	That	men	may	feel the heavier
affliction from a change of circumstances,” i. e., from a reverse of fortune.—Quos pro scelere, &c The order is, concedere inteidum secundiores res et diuturniorem impunitatem his, quos vellent ulcisci pro scelere eorum.
Cum ea ita sint. “That although these things are so,” i.
©., although this is the case.—Uti ea, qua polliceantur, &c.	“	In
order that he may pereeiv® that thev intend to fulfil their promises.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.	237
Page.
e., that he may perceive their sincerity by the fact of their giving 9 nostages. The promises referred to are, that they will go into such part of Gaul as Caesar may appoint, and will dwell there for the time to come.
Ejus ret, &c. “That the Roman people themselves were a ]() proof of that custom.** Alluding to the defeat of Cassius.
Quem ex omni provincia. The Roman infantry were always excellent, but their cavalry were comparatively infirm. Hence we find them generally employing the cavalry of their allies, and, in par- icular, Gallic horse. Caesar’s cavalry was composed at first of Gauls, afterward German horse were also added.
Qui, cupidius, &c. “These, having pursued the enemy’s -ear too eagerly.”—Novissimum agmen. That part of the line of march which is “ newest” to a pursuing enemy, since they first ^ome in contact with it.
Alieno loco. “ In a disadvantageous place.” Alieno loco is ased in this sense in opposition to suo loco, which denotes a favourable place. Sallust, B. I. 64.—Liv. 42, 43.
Sublati. “ Being elated.” So B. G. 6, 37, “ Hoc Victoria mblatus Ambiorix,” and B. C. 2, 37, “ Quibus omnibus rebus sublatus.”—Audacius subsistere coeperunt. “ Began to make a bolder stand.”
Satis habebat in praesentia. “ Deemed it sufficient for the
present.”—Rapinis, &c.	“ From rapine, foraging, and laying waste
the country.” The common editions omit pabulationibus. Vossius first removed it from the text. It was restored by Davies, and is found in good MSS.
Nostrum primum. “Our van.” Supply agmen. Caesar’s intention was to join battle with the Helvetii, before they should proceed much farther through Gaul and reach the territory of the Santones. His object in following them for so long a period was to get the enemy on disadvantageous ground, and then engage and conquer them. The Helvetii constantly avoiding a general action, Caesar left the line of march, and betook himself to Bibracte, for two reasons: one was in order to procure com for his army ; the other was to impress the Helvetii with the belief that the Romans were fleeing, and thus to induce them to hazard an action. This latter event actually happened as he expected it would. Compare chap. 23.
Interim quotidie, &c.	“	Meanwhile	Caesar	kept daily impor
tuning the Aedui for the com which they had promised in the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
] Q name of the state.” Flagitare is precisely the verb to e employed here, since it denotes an earnest and reiterated demand, accompanied with reproaches. The historical infinitive is here used ir place of the imperfect flagitabat. It serves to impart more o* animation to the style than the ordinary imperfect would ; and, be ing frequently employed by historians, it gets its name of the his torical infinitive. Some, however, supply an ellipsis of coepit o) coeperunt, according as the context requires ; but this is unneces sary.
Propter frigora. “ On account of the severity of the climate." The plural is here employed to impart additional emphasis. The climate of Gaul was much colder at the period when Caesar wrote than that of modem France is at the present day. The change has been brought about by the drying up of marshes, the cutting down of forests, and the more general cultivatiQn of the soil. These forests and marshes covered at that time a large portion of the country.
Sub septentrionibus.	“	Under	the	north,”	i.	e., towards the
north. Caesar here speaks of Gaul in its relation to the more southern position of Italy.
Suppetebat. “Was at hand.” Equivalent to ad manum erat, or the simple aderat.
Eo autem frumento, &c. “Besides {autem) he was unable to make use of the com which he had brought up the river Arar in vessels, for this reason {propterea), because the Helvetii, from whom he was unwilling to depart, had turned away their line of march from the Arar.” Subvehere has here its primitive meaning, “ to bring up from a lower place to a higher.”
Diem ex die ducere Aedui. “ The Aedui put him off from day to day.” More literally, “ protracted the affair (i. c., the bring mg of com) from day to day.” Duccre is here the historical infini tive used for the imperfect. Compare note 8, above.
Conferri, comportari, &c. “They told him it was collecting, bringing in, on the road,” i. e., they assured him, at one time, that the com was getting collected by individuals ; at another, that these individuals were bringing it in to some place specified by the magistrates, in order to form the requisite supply for the Romans ; and, at another time again, they told him it was actually on the toad to his army, and near at hand. Compare the Greek paraphrast, who uses idpoifyaQai for conferri, and SyeoBcu for comportari.
Se din tus duci. “That he was put off too long”—FrnNOTUS ON THE FIRST ROOK.
nuntum. The Roman soldiers had no meal or bread served out to them, but merely so much grain, which they had to pound and make into bread for themselves. Thus Lipsius remarks, “ Nolebant cu riose et ab professo opifice panem coctum sumij sed subitarium, et quem sua manu miles parasset.” (De Mil. Horn. dial. 16.) Compare Sallust, B. I. 45.
l&I Qui summo magistratu praerat. “ Who was invested with the chief magistracy.” Magistratu is the old dative for magistra* tuiy a form of frequent recurrence in Caesar. Compare Struve, Lot. Declin&c., p. 36.
Vergobretum. Gesner, in his Latin Thesaurus, gives this word a long penult, but the Greek paraphrast has it short, B«pydfyeroj. The term is derived, by Celtic scholars, from Fear-go-breith, equivalent to vir ad judicium, i. e., “ a man for judging” or “ trying cases.” In Celtic, fear is “ a man,” go “ to” or “ for,” and breatamt “a judge/* Pelletier, in his Dictionary of the Breton mngue, gives breut and brawd, “a trial.”
Tam necessario tempore. “ On so urgent an occasion.”— Eorum precibus adductus. Compare chap. 11.
2 Quod sit destitutus. “ Of his having been left unaided by them,” i. e., not having been supplied with com.
Quod antea tacuerat proponit. “ Discloses what he had previously concealed.” Taceo is one of those intransitive verbs which obtain a transitive force, because an action exerted upon another object is implied though not described in them. (Zumpt, L. G. p. 257.)
Plurimum valeat. “ Is very powerful.” The subjunctive is employed, as indicating the sentiments and conviction of the speaker, not of the historian himself. So possint, immediately after. Compare Crombief Gymn. vol. ii., p. 10.
Privati. “ Though private individuals.” The earlier editions and very many of the MSS. have privatim, “ in their private capacity,” which is not by any means a bad reading. R. Stephens first gave privati.
Hos. Referring to these same individuals.—Seditiosa atque improba oratione. “ By seditious and wicked speeches.**—Frumentum. “ The com.”
Si jam, &c. “Adding, that, if they (the Aedui) cannot hold any longer the sovereignty of Gaul, it is better (for them) to submit to the dominion of Gauls than of Romans,” i. e., it is better k>r them to obey the Helvetii, Gauls like themselves, than total
YNOTES ON THE FIR8T BOOK.
| j strangers, like the Romans. Obtinere is here equivalent to dkutus tenere, for the Aedui had at one time, as Caesar himself informs us (chap. 43), enjoyed the dominion over all Gaul. Compare Davies. ad ioc.
Neque dubitare debere, Ac. “ And that they ought not tc Entertain a doubt, but that,” Ac. Some editions omit debere.
Ab iisdem. “ By these same individuals,” i. e., (he privati mentioned above.—Quaque. “ And whatsoever things.” For el quacumque.
A se. “ By himself,” as Vergobretus.—Quod necessario, Ac. “ As to his having, being compelled by necessity, disclosed the affair to Caesar, he was well aware at how great a risk he did this.” Necessario coactus is here equivalent to necessitate coactus.
Designari. “Was meant.” Literally, “was pointed at.” —Sed quod, Ac. “ But since he was unwilling that these matters should be disclosed, so many being present,” i. e., in the presence of so many. Pluribus, literally, “ a larger number than ordinary.”
Quarit ex solo ea. “ He inquires from him in private about those things.” Solo refers to Liscus.—Dicit liberius, Ac. “ Lis- cus thereupon expresses himself with greater freedom and boldness.”
Complures annos, Ac. “ That he had, for very many years, farmed the customs, and all the other public revenues of the Aedui, at a low rate, because, when he bid, no one dared to bid against him.” By portoria the Roman writers mean the duties paid for goods imported or exported; by vectigalia the public revenues generally. Those who farmed them were called redemtores or publicani, and the revenues were said in this way esse redempta, “ to be contracted for,” i. e., to be farmed.
Licente. From the deponent liceri, not from the intransitive verb liceo. Several MSS. have iUo dicente, and some editors incline to the opinion that this is the true reading. The Venice edition also gives dicente
Facultates ad largiendum magnas. “Extensive means for the exercise of liberality,” i. e., for bestowing presents and rewards.
i 16. Largiter posse. “ Exercised a powerful influence.” Equivalent to esse potentissimum.—Hujus potentia causa. “ In ordei to maintain this influence.” Literally, “ for the sake of this influence.”
i Collocasse. “ He had given in marriage.” Supply-rcwptam, which is expressed with collocasse immediately after. Collocare in this sense is a legal expression.—Ipsum ex Helvetiis, Ac. He
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
had married the daughter of Orgetorix, as has been stated in ]2 chap. 3.
Favere et cupere Helvetiis. “ That he favoured and wished well to the Helvetii.” Cupere is here equivalent to bene veUe, as voluntas occurs in the next chapter for benevolentia.
Odisse etiam suo nomine. “ That he hated also on his own account,”, i. e., cherished a personal hatred towards.
In antiquum locum, &c.	“	Had been restored to his former
degree of influence and consideration,” i. e., had been reinstated in his former influence, <kc.	_
Si quid accidat Romanis, &c.	“	That	if	anything	adverse
happen to the Romans,” i. e., “ if any disaster in war befall them.”
—Summam in spem venire. “ He entertained very great hopes.”
Imperio Populi Romani. “ That, under the sway of the Roman people,” i. e., as long as the Roman people possessed the chief authority in Gaul.
Reperiebat etiam inquirendo, &c. The ellipsis, in this sen
tence, after inquirendo, gives it somewhat the appearance of an irregular construction, and has occasioned considerable trouble to many editors. Supply as follows : inquirendo (proelio equestri adverso), quod pralium equestre adversum, &c.	“	On	inquiring into
the unsuccessful engagement of the horse which had been fought £ few days previous.” The words understood are to be rendered fully, and quod prodium equestre adversum is merely to be translated “ which.” The common text has in queerendo.
Equitatuprceerat. “ Was over the cavalry.” Equitatu is here the old form for the dative. Compare note 16, page 10.
Certissimae res accederent. “ The most undoubted facts were added.”—Quod. “ How that.” Caesar here proceeds to give an enumeration of the facts to which he refers.
Injussu suo, &c. “ Without his own (Caesar’s) orders, and those of his (Dumnorix’s) state, but even without the knowledge )f the latter.” Ipsis refers to the Aedui.
Quare in eum, &c.	“	Why	he should either himself punish
trim, or order the state (of the Aedui) so to do.” When animadvertere is used, with the preposition in, as in the present case, it always denotes that the conduct deemed reprehensible has been carefully inquired into previous to its being punished.
Voluntatem. “ Affection.” Voluntas is here equivalent to benevolentia. So, in the 5th book, chapter 4, we have, “ Cujus eajrgiam in se voluntatem perspexisset ” Compare the remark of
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Donatus (ad Terent. Phorm. Prol. 6, 30), “ Voluntatem pro favore ponit."
Caium Valerium ProcUlum. This name is written variously in the MSS. Some give Troacillum, others Traucillum. The Greek paraphrast has npo«AAo*.—Principem Gallice Provinciae “ A leading man in the province of Gaul.” Principem is here equivalent to inter primores.
Cui summam, &c.	“ In whom he was accustomed to place
the highest confidence on every occasion.” More literally, “ thr highest confidence in all things.”—In concilio Gallorum. Compare chapters 16, 17, and 18.
Ostendit. Some editors omit ostendit, because commone)a ext precedes. But its presence is necessary for the meaning. Caesar “ reminds” (commonefacit) Divitiacus of certain things that had been said in the council, and now “ shoyvs” him other matters that were not previously known to the latter.
Sx?ie ejus offensione animi. “ Without any offence to his (Divitiacus’s) feelings.”—Ipse. Referring to Caesar.—Civitatem. The Aedui.
1 Ne quid gravius, &c.	“	That	he	would	not determine any
thing too severe against his brother,” i. e., would not pass loc severe a sentence upon him.—Ula. “ That those things which Caesar had mentioned.”
Propterea quod, &c. “For this reason, because, at a timt ' when he himself could effect a very great deal by his influence at
home and throughout the rest of Gaul, and his brother very little by reason of his youth, the latter had become powerful through his (Divitiacus’s) means, which consequence and power he was now employing,” &C. Opibus and nereis, following after crevisset, aro both implied in that verb. Nervis is here employed in the sense ot “ power,” the metaphor being borrowed from animals whose strength lies in their nerves.
Ei. Referring to Dumnorix.— Ipse. Divitiacus. — Eum locum amicitiae apud eum. “Such a place in his friendship.” Apud eum, i. e., apud Caesarem.
Faciat The conjunction ut is elegantly understood.—Tan ft
ejus apud se, &c.	“	He	declares	that	his	(Divitiacus’s) influence
with him (Caesar) is so great, that he will pardon both the injury done to the republic and the affront offered to himself, at his desire and entreaty.” Literally, “ to his wish and prayers.”
Adhihet. “ He brings in.” Compare the Greek paraphrast,
Digitized by GoogleNOTE? OH THE FIRST BOOR.
ko2 Utlvov rapaXaSwv.—Proponit. “ He lays before him.”—Omnes ] j suspiciones. “ All grounds of suspicion.”—Divitiaco fratri. “ On account of his brother Divitiacus.”
Dumnorigi custodes ponit. “ He places spies over Dumno- x.” The Greek paraphrast translates custodes too literally: tv $v\aicji
noitjaaro.
Qualis esset natura montis, &c.	“	He	sent persons to ascer
tain what might be the nature of the mountain, and what its ascent by a circuitous route,” i. e., what sort of a mountain it was, and whether it could be ascended, by a circuitous route, from behind.
Facilem esse. Supply ascensum.
Legatum pro pratore. “ His lieutenant with praetorian powers.” By a legatus pro pratore, in the time of the republic, was meant a lieutenant, having charge, under the auspices of a pro- consul or commander, of part of an army or province, and exercising, when necessary, praetorian powers or the functions of a praetor.
The expression, as applied in the present case to Labienus, is a singular one, since he is elsewhere in these commentaries simply called legatus. (Spanhem, de usu et prast. NN. p. 560.) At a .later period, in the time of Augustus, by a legatus pro pratore was meant the governor of a whole province. (Dio Cassius, 43, 13.)
Et iis ducibus. “And with those persons as guides.”— Ascendere. Labienus was to take a circuitous route, and ascend the mountain in the rear of the enemy, so as to fall upon them by surprise when the signal should be given from below. Count de Crisse, after praising the plan of attack, finds fault with Csesar for not having kept up the communication with Labienus by means of couriers, who could have informed him of all the movements of his lieutenant, and for not having agreed beforehand upon some signal, which was to be given by Labienus when he should have reached the summit of the mountain. These simple precautions would have prevented the failure of the plan.
In Marci Crassi. “ In that of Marcus Crassus.” Supply exercitu.
Summus mans. “ The summit of the mountain.” The relation expressed by of in English, is frequently denoted in Latin by an adjective. So imus monst “ the bottom of the mountain timor cxtemusy “ the fear of foreign enemies,” &c.
Ipse. “And when he himself,” i. e., Csesar. Compare the
Greek paraphrast, kclI tov Kafaapos	tuptardros.
Equo admisso. “ With his horse at full gallon.” Admissa
Y9
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE PIR8T BOOR
is here equivalent to concitato. The Greek paraphrast has Upovm r$ Tnry, “ with his horse ail in a foam.*’
A Gallicis armis atque insignibus. “ By the Gallic arms and ensigns.* Oberimus and others understand by insignibus, in this passage, tne ornaments of the helmets ; but the reference undoubtedly is to military standards. The Greek paraphrast also favours the same interpretation, expressing insignibus by arguim.
Subducit. “ Draws off.”—Ut erat et praeceptum. “ Since he had been instructed.”—Ipsius. Referring to Caesar
Prope. The Oxford MS. gives propter, which Oudendoip thinks was the original and genuine lection.
Multo denique die. “ At length, after much of the day had passed.” Equivalent to “ cum multum diei processerat,” as it is expressed by Sallust B. I. 51.
Quod non vidisset, &c.	“	Had	brought	back	to	him	intelli
gence of what he had not seen, as if it had actually been seen by him.” The Greek paraphrast expresses this very neatly, & o&c eUt* &s ISutv isayyttkai.—Sibi, i. e., Caesari.
Quo consuerat intervallo. “ At the usual distance.” More literally, “ with the usual interval,” i. e., between his own army and theirs. The full expression is (eo) intervallo, quo (intervallo) consuerat (sequi).
Quod omnino, &c.	“	Since but two days in all remained
until the time when,” &c.—Exercitu. The old dative for exercitui.—Metiri. Compare note 15, page 10.
Rei frumentariae, <kc. “ He thought he must provide for a supply of com,” i. e., make arrangements to procure it from the Aedui, on whom he relied mainly for his supplies of grain. The full expression is, sibi prospiciendum esse.
Decurionis equitum Gallorum. “A captain of the Gallic horse.” A decurio, at first, as the name imports, commanded only ten horse ; and there were three of these officers in every turma or troop of thirty men, making the whole number in the turma, including the Decuriones, thirty-three. (Varro, L. L. 4, 16.) In the time of Caesar, however, a change had taken place. The turma now consisted of thirty-two horsemen, and the whole were commanded by one decurio, who retained the old name, although more than ten were now under his orders. Consult Vegetius, 2, 14, “ Triginta duo equites ab uno decurione, sub uno vexillo, reguntur,” &c.
Discedere a se. “ Were departing from them,” i. e., were
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
uming off, and changing their route. Discedere is the imperfect of J 4 the infinitive.—Superioribus locis occupatis. “ Although the higher grounds had been seized by them,” i. e., by the Romans.—Quod re frumentaria, &c.	“	Because	they	tmsted	that	the	Romans
could be cut off from their supply of com,” i. e., flattered them selves with the hope of being able to accomplish this.
Consilio. Compare the commencement of chap. 10.—A no txssimo agmine. Consult note 3, page 10.
Animum advertit. “ Perceives.” The same as animadvertit. The expression id animum advertit is nothing more ilian vertit animum ad id. Several examples of the use of animum adverto for animadverto are given by Gronovius, ad Liv. 28, 14. A familiar instance occurs in Sallust B. I. 93, “ Animum advertit cochleas,” <&c.
In colle medio, &c.	“	Drew up, on the middle of the hill, a
triple line of the four veteran legions, in such a way as to place above him, on the very summit, the other two legions which he had levied very recently in Hither Gaul, and all the auxiliaries,” i. e., he drew up his four veteran legions on the slope of the hill, in three lines; and then placed above them, on the top of the hill, the two new legions, on whom, as consisting of recent levies, he could le§s safely rely ; and along with these last he stationed also the auxiliary forces. The student will observe that the lines here spoken of are not to be considered as composed of one continuous rank, but as so many lines of cohorts, and that each cohort had its flank-companies, if we may so speak, of velites, or light-armed troops. Compare the remark of Count de Crissd, “ d chaque cohorte itaient ses manches de vilites.”
Quas in Gallia citeriore, &c. Compare chap. 10. By Gallia citerior is meant the northern part of Italy. Compare note 12, page 7.
Et eum, &c. “And ordered this place to be guarded by Jg those who stood posted in the upper line.” The reference is to those on the top of the hill. Eum, i. e., mm locum, means the place in which the baggage was.
Confertissima acie. “ In very close array.”—Phalange facta.
M A phalanx being formed.” According to Orosius (6, 7), the German phalanx consisted of a large body of men in close array, with their shields locked over their heads. This would resemble the testudo of the Romans. The Macedonian phalanx, on the other band, was an oblong battalion of pikemen, consisting of sixteen in
Digitized by GoogleMOTE8 ON THE FIRST BOOK.
flank and five hundred in front. The whole number, of course, was 8000. The amount of the German phalanx is not given. Ths phalanx of the Helvetii most probably resembled that of the Germans.
Sub primam, &c.	“ Came up close to our front line.”
Silo. Supply equo.—Orr*mum. Governed by equis. Compare the Greek paraphrast: wpQrop piv rip iavrov, hrura bi roif wdvrwp T&v SXXup Jnrovf berobuv woitfcdfupog.
 Omnium. Referring both to his soldiers and himself.—E loco superiore. “ From their higher position,” i. e., from the slope of the hill.
Destrictis. A more accurate form than districtu.—Impetum Jecerunt. “ Charged.”
Gallis magno, &c. “ It proved a greathinderance to the Gauls, as regarded the fight, that, several of their shields being transfixed and fastened together by a single blow of the javelins, they were unable, as the iron point had bent itself, either to pull it out, or, their, left hand being thus impeded, to make battle with sufficient advantage. So that many, after having-for a long time tossed their
. arms to and fro, preferred flinging away the shield from their hands,
^l^frflghting with their persons unprotected by it.” The student
' wffl	mind-that their shields were locked above their heads,
a&rtapped considerably over one another. Hence” a javelin cast J«wn' (rom a higher place would pierce, of course, through more than one, and in this way fasten them together. Compare note 2. tjtijjPedem referre. “ To retreat.” Literally, “ to carry back the '	JSome	editors	insert	Helvetii	after	coeperunt, but this is suf-
'nciently implied 6pm the context.
Agmen hdstium claudebant. “ Closed the enemy’s line oi march,” i. e., brought up the rear.
Ex itinere, &c.	“ Having attacked our men as we pursued,
on their open flank,” i. e., on their right flank, which, on account of its not being covered by the shields of the soldiers, was more open to attack. Cossar was guilty of a great error in pursuing the Helvetii on their retreat, without observing the Boii and Tulingi, who acted as a body of reserve, and who attacked him in flank at he passed by, and then began to surround him in the rear. He should have ordered the two legions posted on the top of the hill to follow immediately alter him, and in this way might have opfxeed the attack of the Boii.
Romani conversa signa, dee. “ The Romans, having faced
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Pag*.
•bout, advanced against the enemy in two divisions,” i. e., the |5 rear rank, consisting of the third line,1 faced about and advanced against the Boii and Tulingi, who were coming up in the rear; while the first and second lines continued facing towards, and made head against, the Helvetii, who were now coming down again from the mountain to which they had retreated. The two divisions were composed, the one of the third line, the other of the first and second lines.
Ancipiti pralio. “ In a divided conflict.” This engagement ts here called anceps, because it was fought in two places, i. e., between the first division and the Helvetii, and between the second division and the Boii. The phrase ancipiti pradio commonly means,
“ in doubtful conflict.”
Alteri. “ The one party,” i. e., the Helvetii, who had come down again from the mountain.—AUeri. The Boii and Tulingi.
Hora septima. The Romans divided the natural day, from
sunrise to sunset, into twelve hours, which were, of course, of different lengths at different seasons of the year, being shorter in winter than in summer. The Seventh hour will coincide with our one o’clock.	.	*	t	*
Aversum hostem. “The back of a foe.’^ Literally,	r	“*■
enemy turned away,” i. e., in flight. Compare jheT G^£y^fr*para- phrast: obSiU h? l&ttv rbv iroXipiov fiSvv/jOr/.
Ad multam noctem. “ Until late in the night.” /
1. Mataras ac tragulas subjiciebant. “ Kept plying lances and javelins from beneath.” By matara are meant a kind ^of lances, of greater weight than the ordinary spear ; and by tyigSk^f' light javelins, with a strap attached, by which they*were thrown. ' Strabo (4. p. 196, ed. Casaub ) calls the matdra ta\rov ri uSos, and the Greek paraphrast renders mataras by iraXri. Hesychius makes mention of paidput, which, he defines to be ir>an5r*pa Aoy\tiia, and adds that the word is a Celtic one. The Spanish matar, “ to kill,” and the old Frenoh term matrasser, which has the same meaning, appear to be deduced from the same root with matara. Compare Adelung, Mithridates, vol. ii., p. 64, and Gloss. Med. et Inf. Lot. toI. iv., p. 597.
Digitized by Google248
p>i«
] g and many other critics, very properly regard the expression, mutam partem noctis itinere intermisso, as tautological, and a mere gloss of the adverb continenter in the previous clause. It is omitted, besides, in the Greek paraphrase.
Qui si juvissent, &c.	“	For	that, if they should aid them, he
would regard them in the same light in which he did the Helvetii,”
e., as enemies. The full construction is, se habiturum illos (scii. Lingonas) eodem loco quo habeat Helvetios.
§. Qui, cum. “ When these.”—Atque eos in eo loco, &c.	“	And
when he had ordered them to wait his arrival in the place in which they then were, they obeyed.” Eos refers to the whole of the Helvetii, who were ordered not to retreat any farther, but to wait CaBsar’s coming up. Hence we see the force of essent in the subjunctive mood, and the literal meaning of the clause quo tum essent, “ where they were said to be.” If Caesar had written quo turn erant, it would have referred to the ambassadors merely.
Eo. Referring to the place where the Helvetii were when they sent the ambassadors, and where CaBsar had ordered them to remain until he should come up.
Verbigenas. Some commentators are in favour of Urbigenus as a reading, and they suppose the original, or Celtic form of the name * to have been Urbegoew, from Urba, a town of the Helvetii, mentioned in the ltin. Anton., and gow, a tract, or district (i. e., “ a district near Urba”). The true form, however, is Verbigenus. Compare Oberlin. ad loc. and the authorities there cited.
Occultari. u Be concealed,” i. e., from Caesar.—Aut omnino ignorari. “ Or altogether unknown,” i. e., remain wholly unno-
y . iced.—Prima nocte. “ As soon as it was night.” More literally, ^at the beginning of the night.” Some have prima noctis vigilia, Others primer nocti* hora).
l*he	verb rescire is generally employed when we
come*tb the, knowledge of anything which has been sought to be concealed from us, or which is unexpected, &c. Compare the remark of Aulus Gellius, 2, 19, “ Aliter dictum esse rescivi, aut rescire, apud eos qui diligenter locuti sunt, nondum invenimus quam super his rebus, quae aut occulto consilio latuerint, aut contra spem opinionemve usuvenerint.”
Quorum per fines ierant, &c. The order is, imperavit his, per fines quorum ierant, uti, &c.—Si sibi purgati esse vellent “ If they wished to be free from all blame in his eyes.^*
Reductos in numero hostium habuit. w He treated them,
Digitized by LiOOQleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOR,
w&en brought back, as enemi^,” i. e., either caused them to be put J g to deathy or sold them as slaves ; most probably the latter.
Omnibus fructibus amissis. “ All the productions of th$* earth being destroyed.” Some editions read frugibus, but less elegantly. Fructus is more extensive in qaeaning than fruges, and denotes not only the grain, but all the pj*>duce of the fields in general. Compare Broukhus. ad TibulL V, 1, 35.
Jpsos. Referring to the Helvetii, Tulingi, and Latobrigi.— Restituere. “ To rebuild.” Comme chap. 5.
Vacare. “.To remain uninhabited.” Plutarch(Vit. Goes. c. 17 18) makes mention of, and bestows >just praise on, the policy of Caesar, in compelling the Helvetii to reoccupy their country.
Boios, petentibus Aeduis, &c. The construction is, “ concessit Aeduis, petentibus ut collocarent Boios in suis finibus, quod illi (scii. Boii), cogniti erant egregia virtute.”—Quibus illi, &c.
The common text has merely a semicolon after concessit, but a fuller stop is required. Translate as follows: “ Whereupon they gave them lands, and afterward admitted them to an equal participation of rights and freedom with .themselves.” More literally, “ received them into the same condition with respect to rights and freedom as they themselves were in.” Compare the Greek paraphrast:
To<5rot5 fibv o3v oi *ESoveis Tire pev %<bpav ISvicav’ litura <F iXevdtpovs rt tai abrovdpovs eavrovs litolrjaav.
Tabula. “ Lists.” Literally, “ tablets.” The term tabula, as here employed, denotes any hard material, especially wood, on which characters were inscribed. The Roman tabula were of wood covered with wax, and the instrument for writing was a stylus, sharp
at one end and round or flat at the other. The round or flat en<J, . f was used for rubbing the wax over when a correction to Ua " made. Hence the expression of Horace, sape stylum vertas, “ tum the stylus frequently,” i. e., “ be frequent in yofcr eqppre^ions of what you write.”	\	•
Literis Grads confecta. “Made out in Creekdharacters.”
Tt is a very disputed .question among philologists.whether Ceesar here means to ascribe to the Helvetii a knowledge of the Greek language, or only an employment of the Greek characters. The latter is undoubtedly the more correct opinion. Ca?sar, it is true, in the sixth book (c. 14), speaks of the Druids employing the Greek letters in their private and public transactions, but here again the reference appears to be merely to the characters of the Greek language, not to Greek words themselves. So again, when Strabo
GoogleNOTES ON THE FIfLST BOON.
informs us(4, p. 181, ed. Cos.) that, a little before his own age, tbs custom prevailed in Gaul of writing the forms of agreements, &c., in Greek (rd ovp66\aia 'E>Xa»iorl ypdfovai), he cannot mean the Greek language by 'EXAifyurrl, but only the letters of the Greek alphabet : the words were Celtic, the characters were Greek. Strabo likewise states the source whence this knowledge of the Greek characters was obtained, namely, the Phocean colony of Massilia, in the south of Gaul. Even supposing, therefore, that the Gallic tribes, in the vicinity of this place, had acquired a familiarity with, not merely the written characters, but the language of the Greeks themselves (a supposition far from probable), the same cannot certainly be said of the more northern tribes, and among them of the Helvetii. It will be remembered, too, that Caesar, on one occasion (B. G. 5, 48), sent a letter to his lieutenant written in Greek characters, lest it should otherwise, if intercepted, have been read by the Nervii. Now this certainly would not have been the case had the northern tribe just mentioned been acquainted even with the Greek characters, for Caesar’s letter was composed of Latin words, expressed by Greek letters.
Ratio. “An account,” or “estimate.” — Qui numerus. For quis numerus.—Eorum qui arma ferre possent. Neatly expressed in the Greek paraphrase by the single term arpanurwv.
Summa erat. Ancient authorities differ as to these amounts.
Plutarch (Vii. Cess. c. 18) makes the whole number 300,000 (rpidicotra pvpidiag.)	Polyaenus (8, 23) gives the number of the
Helvetii at 80,000 (4«ru» pvptdSas). Strabo states that 400,000 Gauls perished, and that the rest returned home (4, p. 193, ed. Cas.), The discrepance is occasioned, no doubt, by the errors of the copyists.
Capitum. Best rendered hereby our English word “ souls.” Thus, “ two hundred and sixty-three thousand souls of the Helvetii ”
Censu habito. “An estimate having been made,” i. e., an actual enumeration having taken place. The term census is here employed in its general sense. In its Roman acceptation, it meant a review of the people, and a valuation of their estates, together with an estimate of their numbers.
Gallics. The division named Celtica is here meant, since Belgica was at this time preparing for war.
Intelligere sese, &c.	“	Adding,	that	although,	on account o«
former injuries done to the Roman people by the Helvetii, he (Caesar) had inflicted punishment on the latter in lyar, still they themselves were sensible that this had happened no less to the ad-
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
rootage of the land of Gaul, than to that of the Roman people.” Supply dicentes after gratulatum, which is, in fact, however, contained in it. The student will observe the double genitive, in the expression injwriis Helvetiorum populi Romani, where populi is governed by Helvetiorum. In constructions of this kind one of the genitives is commonly active in its meaning (to borrow a grammatical expression), and the other passive. Thus, in the present instance, Helvetiorum is active, and populi passive. (Compare Peri zonius, ad Sanct. Min. 2, -3.—Vol. i., p. 209, ed. Bauer.)
Terrae Gallice. For terra Gallica. Compare Hirtius, Bell.
Afr. 3, “ Namque nullum portum terra Africa,” and Sallust, fragm. Hist. 4, “ Dua Gallia mulieres.” Those critics are wrong, therefore, who seek to reject terra from the text.
Ex magna copia. “ From the large number who would in that event present themselves,” i. e., in case the Helvetii obtained the empire of Gaul.
Stipendiarias. u Tributary.” By stipendiarii the Roman writers, strictly speaking, mean those who paid a certain sum annually in money ; and by vectigales those who rendered, as tribute,
certain portion of the produce of the ground. The latter generally oaid a tenth of com (rdr osupspbms) and a fifth of other produco (r&r fvrevopiv*»). Compare Crusius, ad Suet. Vit. Jul. c. 20.
In diem certam. “ For a particular day.”—Sese habere, dec “ That they had certain matters which they wished to ask of him, in accordance with the general consent,” i. e., if the general consent of their countrymen could be first obtained.
Ne quis enunciaret, &c.	“	That	no	one should disclose their J 0
deliberations, except those unto whom this office should be assigned
by the assembly at large,” i. e., that the result of their deliberations should be communicated to Caesar by individuals whom the genera] assembly should authorize so to do, and by no others. Compare the Greek paraphrast: fnj&ha SXXov, d pi) rods rcdvruv rSv rrfXAor bsl rotb-a aiprrovs, raSra rip Kaiaapi inayyiXeis.
Eo concilio dimisso. “ When the assembly, so summoned, had been held and had broken up.” Compare the Greek paraphrase rmirtis rffr ovv6Sou avvaOpotaOehnjf-
Qui ante fuerant ad Casarem. “ Who bad been with Cwsar on the previous occasion.” Ad is here equivalent to apud. Ciac- co&us and Scaliger regard these words as a mere interpolation. Bentley proposes venerant for fuerant. As regards the use of ad for apudt consult Drakcnborch, ad Liv. 7, 7.
Z
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
18	1. Secreto. The common text has secreto in occulto, which cao-
not possibly be correct. Oudendorp, indeed, endeavours to de.efxi the common reading, by making secreto refer to the absence of all who might otherwise overhear the conference, and occulto to the secret nature of the place where the conference was held; but Bentley, with far more correctness, regards in occulto as a mere gloss, and we have therefore rejected it.
Non minus se id, &c.	“	That	they	strove	and laboured no
less anxiously to prevent what they might say from being divulged, than to obtain what they wished.”
 Factiones. “ Parties.”	Factio,	according to Festus, was
originally, a term of good import, “ honestum vocabulum,” and denoted merely a certain class or order of persons. Its meaning ol “party” or “faction” arose at a subsequent period. Compare Dacier, ad loc.
Principatum tenere. “ Stood at the head.”—Hi. Referring to the Aedui and Arverni.—Potentatu. “ The superiority.” Potentatus is rather an uncommon word, but still is to be met with in some good writers. Thus Livy, 26, 38, “ Aemulo potentatus inimicus rem Anmbali aperit,” and Lactantius (Dvo. List. 6, 17), “ Opes istas et honores et potentatus et regna ipsa condemnet.”
Sequanis que. The Sequani are here mentioned as having been the allies of the Arvemi. In the sixth book (c. 11) the Se* quani are said to have been at the head of one of the two great parties, and no mention is made of the Arvemi.
Horum. “ Of the latter.” Referring to the Germans.—
Posteaquam agros, &c.	“	That,	after	these	savage and barbarous
men had grown fond of the lands, and manner of living, and abun* dance of the Gauls, a larger number had been brought over.” Copia is generally used in the plural for “ forces,” and in the singular for “abundance” or “plenty.” But sometimes, as in the present instance, the plural is used in the sense of “ abundance.” Compare Oudendorp, ad Frontin. 2, 1, 18.
Clientes. “ Dependants.” Referring to the petty states in alliance with and dependant upon their power. When the term clientes is applied in these commentaries to the retainers of individual chieftains, those persons are meant who are elsewhere called ambacti or soldurii. Compare book 6, chap. 15 and 19.—Semel atque iterum. “ Repeatedly.” Literally, “ once and again.” ?
Hospitio. The reference is to public hospitality. fVbeu g
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON" THB FIRST BOOK.
rags.
nation was entitled to this, their ambassadors were allowed a place j g of honour at public spectacles, and were splendidly entertained.
Unum se. “ That he alone.” Divitiacus alludes here to tnmseif.
Auxilium postulatum. He did not, however, succeed in his application. (B. G. 6, 12.) His visit to Rome is incidentally referred to by Cicero {de Div. 1, 41), from whose language it appears that Divitiacus was one of the order of Druids.
Qui asset. “ Which was, according to him.” The tubjunc- ] (1 tive is here employed to express the sentiments of the speaker, not those of the writer himself. The same remark will hold good with respect to the other subjunctives in the course of the speech.
Quibus locus, &c.	“	For	whom	a	settlement and habitations
were to be procured.”
Neque enim, &c. “ For neither was the Gallic territory to be compared with that of the Germans, nor the mode of living here to be placed on an equality with that of theirs.” The meaning is, that the Gallic territory was far superior in point of fertility to the German, and that the Gallic mode of life was more refined and civilized than that pursued by their German neighbours. The unusual % mode of expression by which this idea is conveyed (it being more customary to place the inferior object in the first clause), has led Ciacconiu8 to emend the sentence as follows: “ Neque enim conferendum esse cum Gallico Germanorum agrum” But we may easily conceive, that one thing may be so far superior to another as not to admit of a comparison with it, and hence the ordinary lection
is correct enough.
Neque hanc, &c. Some editors, not attending to the peculiar force of hie and Me, make kanc refer to the Germans, and ilia to the Gauls. Hie always relates to that which is near or belongs to the person speaking; ilie to some remoter person or object Zumpt, L. G. p. 244.
Ut semel. “ When once,” i. e., “ as soon as.”
Ad Magetobriam. “ In the vicinity of Magetobria.” The place here alluded to is not known, and hence much uncertainty prevails about the true reading. Almost all the MSS. have Adma- getobrice as one word, which Oudendorp adopts. The early editions give Amagetobria, with which the Greek paraphrast agrees, b r% 'Apaytrotplq. Oberimus, however, whom we have been induced to follow, prefers ad Magetobriam, and thinks that traces of the ancient name may easily be recognised in the modem Moigte isNOTE8 ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Broie, at the confluence of the Arar and Ogno, near the village ot Pontaiiler. This opinion derives strong support from the circumstance of a fragment of an ancient urn having been obtained from the bed of the Arar, near the place just mentioned, in the yeai 1802, on which the word MAGETOB could be distinctly traced. Compare Oberimus, ad Joe.
7 Et in eos omnia exempla, &c.	“	And	exercised	upon	them
all manner of cruelties.” The expression exempla cruciatusque is put by an hendiadys for exempla cruciatuum, and exempla itself is equivalent here to genera.
Hominem esse barbarum, &c.	“	That	he wtfs a savage, pas
sionate, hot-headed man.” Iracundus denotes one who is quicktempered and passionate, iratus one who is merely angry at some particular time.
Nisi si. This form is used occasionally by the best writers, with the same force merely as the simple nisi. Thus, Cic. Ep. ad Fam. 14, 2, “ Nisi si quis ad me plura scripsit,” and Ovid, Ep. Her. 4, 111, “ Nisi si manifesta negamus ” Consult Ouuendorp, ad loc.
Ut domo emigrent. ‘‘Namely, emigrate from home.”— Fortunamque, quacumque accidat, dtc. “ And make trial of whatever fortune may befall them,” i. e., submit to whatever fortune, &c.
Hoc. Alluding to the disclosures he was now making.—Non dubitare. Supply sese.
Atque exercitus. “ And that of his army,” i. e., the weight which the presence of his army would give to his interference in behalf of the Gauls.—Deterrere. Supply turn, referring to Ariovistus.—Ne major multitudo, dec. “ So as to prevent any greater number of Germans from being brought by him across the Rhine.” Literally, “ in order that any greater number of Germans may not be led across the Rhine.”
Ab Ariovisti injuria. “ From the outrages of Ariovisto».”
Habita. “ Having been delivered.”—Unos ex omnibus Sequanos, dec. Hettmannus thinks it altogether incredible that the Sequani, who had invited Ariovistus into Gaui against the Aedm; and who had been accustomed to wage continual wars with them, should now be found acting in concert with the delegates of the latter people. The cruelty and oppression of Ariovistus, however, which the Sequani had experienced in a still stronger degree than even the Aedui, had very naturally brought about this result, and united in one common cause those who had previously been open
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
enemies to each other. It will be seen, moreover, from chap. 35, J ^ that the Sequani were desirous of restoring to the Aedui the hostages which *hey had in their possession belonging to that nation, if Ariovistus would allow this to be done.
Respondere. The historical infinitive, for the imperfect res pandebant. So permanere, at the end of the sentence, for perma nebant.
Exprimere. “Extort.” Some more recent MSS. and many editions have possent instead of posset. This, however, is altogether erroneous, unless we read expromere. The phrase expromere vocem is applied to one who speaks, but exprimere vocem to one who compels another to speak.
Hoc. “On this account.”—Pro, reliquorum. This is the 20 reading of the Oxford MS. The common text has quam.
Absentis. “Even when absent.”—Tamen fugee facultas daretur. “ The means of escape were nevertheless afforded,” i. e., they still had it in their power to escape his cruelty by flight. Some editions have tantum, which is an inferior reading.
Quorum oppida omnia, &c. This is explained a little farther on where Ariovistus states (ch. 44) that he had settlements in Gaul granted by the people of that country themselves. These settlements were the towns which'he had first got possession of by agreeing to garrison and defend them, and which he subsequently retained in order to keep the Sequani and other Gauls under his control.
Omnes cruciatus. “ All kinds of cruelties.”—Essent perferendi. The grammarians mentioned by Ruddiman (Instit. L. G. vol ii., p. 252) read esset perferendum, making cruciatus the accusative. Compare Ramshom, L. G. p. 373.
Gallorum animos, &c.	“	Strove	to	cheer	by	words	the	spirits
of the Gauls.” Compare the Greek paraphrast, robs TdWovs
naptfwO^aaro.
Beneficis sus. “ By his former kindness towards him.” Caesar had, during his consulship the year previous, obtained for Ario vistus, from the Roman senate, the title of “ King and friend. Compare Dio Cassius, 38,34: Plutarch, Vit. Cues. c. 19, and chapters 35, 42, and 43 of the present book.
Secundum ea, &c.	“	Besides	these	statements	(on	the	part
of the Gauls), many circumstances induced him to think that this affair ought to be considered of and undertaken by him.” The
Z 2
GoogleNOTES OX THE FIRST BOOK.
rag*.
preposition secundum has here a meaning derived directly from its primitive force of following after something which has gone before.
Multa res. The reasons here assigned are all a mere pretence. Caesar’s real object was to subjugate the whole of Gaul, and the present state of affairs between the Gauls and Ariovistus afforded him a favourable opportunity of interfering in the political concerns of the country, and of taking the first step towards the accomplishment of his object.
Fratres consanguineosque. “ Brothers and kinsmen.” Compare Cic. Ep. ad Att. 1, 19, and Tacit. Arm. 11, 36.
Paulatim autem Germanos, &c.	*	For	the	Germans» more
over, to become gradually accustomed,” &c.—Periculosum. Supply esse. “ Was fraught with danger.”
Sibi temperaturos. “Would restrain themselves.” Temperare, with the dative, signifies “ to set bounds to anything,” “ to moderate,” or “ restrain.” With the accusative it means “ to regulate” or “arrange.”
Cimbri Teutonique. Alluding to the famous inroad of these barbarian hordes upon the Roman territory. Consult Hist. Index.
Prasertim cum Sequanos, &c. “Especially since the Rhone alone separated the Sequapi,” &c. Bentley thinks that from prasertim to divideret is the interpolation of some later hand.
Occurrendum. “He must thwart.” Supply esse sibi.— Tantos spiritus. “ Such airs of importance.” Compare the Greek paraphrast, 8 y<5p *Api6Su&os obrwg 8irtpt<pp6vei.
Uti aliquem locum, &c. “To name some intervening place for a conference on the part of each,” i. e., where a mutual conference might be held.
Et summis utriusque rebus. “And about matters of the greatest importance to both of them ” Bentley thinks that, on account of the presence of utriusque m this clause, it should be thrown out of the previous one (utriusque coUoquio). Caesar, however, often repeats the same word after a very short interval.
Si quid ipsi, dec. “ That if he himself had need of anything from Caesar he would have come to him.” Opus est is either used impersonally, in which case it has, like verbs of wanting, an ablative ; or personally, pnd then the thing wanted is in the nominative. This latter construction is most common with the neuters of pronouns and adjectives. Zumpt, L. G. p. 299.
l .Pie. “ That commander.” Referring to Caesar.—Se. The ablative. Supply the preposition a. Compare the Greek paraphrast,
trap’ tuou.N«T£8 #m THE FIRST VtiK.
\
w	nf#.
Sine magno cbmmeatu atque emolimento. “ Without great 2 | expenditure of means and great trouble.” Commeatus has here a general reference to supplies of all kinds, including also those of money, or, as Plautus terms it {Pseud. 1, 5, 9), “ commeatus argentarius.”—Emolimentum, in this passage, is equivalent to labor
or molitio. For, as eniti is “nitendo efficere aliquid,” and nisus therefore the same as labor or opera, so emoliri is “ moliendo efficere aliquid ,” and emolimentum the same as labor ipse. Consult Morus, ad loc. The Greek paraphrast well expresses the Latin terms in question : 6n fitydhn dmwdvne re teal mXXifg ic^oXlaf.
Quid negotii. “ What business.”—In sua Gallia. These words depict very forcibly the arrogance of Ariovistus. Florus (3,
10) gives the reply of the German leader as follows: “ Quis est autem Caesar 1 Si vult, venial. Quid ad ilium quid agal Germania nostra 1 Num ego me interpono Romanis ?”
Quam bello vicisset. The student will again mark the use of the subjunctive, as referring to the sentiments of the speaker, not
hose of the writer.
>. Iterum ad earn, dec. Cesar’s object, in sending these ambassadors a second time, was purposely to initate Ariovistus, and lead him on to some act of hostility.
Quoniam tanto suo, &c. “ That whereas, after having been treated with so much kindness by himself and the Roman people (since he had been styled king and friend by the senate, during his own (Caesar’s) consulship), he was now making such a return as this to himself and the Roman people, as, when invited to come to a conference, to make a difficulty about complying, and to think that it was not necessary for him to speak and inform himself about a matter of common interest, these were the demands which he (•«- ear) had now to mako of him.”
Quam. For aliquam.—Deinde. u In the next place.”
Voluntate ejus. “With his full consent.” Ejus refers to Ariovistus. Voluntate sua would have referred to Caesar. •
9r Sese. In the common editions, the pronoun is omitted here, in consequence of its occurring again after the parenthesis. But its presence is requisite in both places for the sake of perspicuity
10. Marco Messala, &c. A. U. C. 693, B^C. 61.—Senatus censuisset. “ The senate had decreed.” Grotius {de Jure B. et P.
3, 10) shows that Caesar himself was not free from blame when he brought this war upon Ariovistus. There certainly was no need of any formal argument on this point, as the case speaks for itself
t
GoogleMOTES OM THE FIRST BOOK,
21 Ii. Obtineret. “Might hold,” i. e., might govern for the time being. Compare note 3, page 6.
Quod commodo, &c.	“	Should, as far a» he could do so con
sistently with the interests of the republic, protect,” &e., i. e^ should take care that, while he was protecting the Aedui and the other friendly states, none of the more important interests of the Roman people were jeopardized by the step. Quod is used in this clause for quantum. Consult Sancttus, Min. vol. i., p. 596, where the present passage is quoted among others. The grammatica) construction is, defenderet Aeduos, &e., secundum id quod posset facere, &c. Compare the Greek p&raphrast, I* fop y* «i 'P»/*<&»
ftfj 6\dirroivTO.
Item. “ In like manner.” Some MSS. have idem, which Scaliger adopts, and in which he is followed by several subsequent editors. The true reading is item.—Victis. “ Their vanquished.”
-Non ad alterius, &c.	“	Not	according to the dictates of another,
but their own pleasure.”
Quemadmodum, &c.	“	In	what way they were to exercise
their own rights.” Uteretur refers back to Populo Romano.—In suo jure. “ In the exercise of his rights.”
Stipendiarios. Compare note 13, page 17.
Magnam Casarem, &c.	“ That Caesar was striving to do
him a great injury, since he was endeavouring, by hts coming, to render his revenues less valuable to him.” The student will mark the force of the two imperfects, facere (the imperfect of the infinitive) and faceret. He will note also the use of the subjunctive after the relative, as indicating the reason or cause of the previous assertion. Ariovistus had imposed a certain tribute on the Aedui, the payment of which was secured by hostages; Caesar required these hostages to be given back, an act which, according to Ariovistus, would weaken his chance of a faithful payment of the tribute, and would render it less valuable, because less certain than before.
Injuria. “Without just cause.”—Si in eo manerent, &c. “ In case they remained steadfast in that which had been agreed upon.”
Longe iis, &c.	“	The	title	of brothers, given them by the
Roman people, would be far from proving any assistance to them,” i. e., would not save them from punishment. A metaphor borrowed from things that are far off, and consequently unable to lend any effectual aid.
° Quod sibi. &c.	“	That,	as	to the menace which Cesar had
Digitized byNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
employed towards him, namely, that he would not overlook any in- 22 iuries done to the Aedui,” &c.
Exercitatissimi in armis. Compare Tacitus, Germ. 14,
“ Nec arare terram aut exspectare annum tam facile persuaseris, quam vocare hostes et vulnera mereri.”
Inter annos quatuordecim. “During fourteen years.” Aj inter signifies the medium between two extremes, so, when applied to time, it expresses the interval between the commencement and close of a given period, and may, therefore, be rendered by 4<fwhile” y or “ during.” Butler's Latin Prep. p. 70.
Harudes. Compare chapter 31.
Treviri autem. Supply veniebant nuntiatum.
Pagos centum Succorum. “ That the new levies from the hundred cantons of the Suevi.” The Suevi, according to Cssar (B. G. 4, 1), formed a hundred cantons, from each of which a thousand warriors were annually levied to make war abroad. The force mentioned in the text will amount, therefore, to 100,000 men. We must not, however, fall into the error of some, who regard it as the entire military strength of the Suevi.
Qui conarentur. “Who were endeavouring, as they said.”
The student will mark the force of the subjunctive here, as referring to the statements of those who speak, not of the writer himself.
Vehementer comrj/iotus. “ Greatly alarmed.”—Nova manus. “This new body.”—Minus facile resisti posset. “ He might be less easily withstood.” The reference is to Ariovistus.
Re frumentaria, &c. “His arrangements for a supply of
corn being made as quickly as possible.” This is very neatly expressed by the Greek paraphrast:	hfovfi&n	rdyiara	rbv	crpardp
IricriTiadfjievoi.
 Contendere. “Was hastening.”—Profecisse.	“Had accomplished.” This is the reading of one of the best MSS., and is adopted by Oudendorp in his smaller edition, Oberlinus, Lemaire, and others. The common text has processisse, which arose prob ably from a gloss. Bentley conjectures profectum esse.
Summa facultas. “A very great plenty.” Facultas is here equivalent to copia. Most of the copyists, not understanding this, substituted difficultas, which produces a directly opposite meaning. Only a few MSS. have the correct reading facultas The early editions give the erroneous lection.
Ad ducendam bellum. “ For protracting the war.”—Facul tatem. “ Means.’*' The recurrence of this term, after so short a»
Digitized by GoogleNOTBS ON TU FIRST BOOK.
r»a»-
interva., led Gnavius to suspect that facultas in the previous part
of the sentence was a mere interpolation. It would appear rather io be one among the many arguments that might be adduced, in favour of the opinion that these commentaries were hastily penned wn the spot.
Dubis. No MS. has Dubis. All are more or less cor* k up ted here, and read Adduobis, Alduodubis, Alduodusius, Adductr Umbis, or Alduasdubis. Amid this farrago of uncouth forms, Cel- hums, following Strabo, Ptolemy, and other authorities, gave Dubis as ihe true reading, which has been received ever since. (Geogr. Antiq. 2, 2, 17.—Vol. ii., p. 136, ed. Schwartz.) Whence the corruption in the MSS. originated-is difficult to say. Oberlinus thinks that the earlier name of the river was Addua or Aldua, and that some of the copyist» placed its more recent name in the margin of a MS., m this form, si. Dubis, that is, alias Dubis, from a blending of which two names, through the ignorance of subsequent copyists, the suange forms above cited arose. Moebius, on tbe other hand (Bibt. Crit. Hild. 1824, p. 232), ingeniously suggests, that the true rending may have been quod flumen adductum, ut circino circumductum, omitting the name of the river altogether. The opinion of Ooerlinus, however, is certainly the better of the two.
Ut circino circumductum. “ As if traced round it by a pair af compasses,” i. eu, as if its circular course had been traced by a pair of compasses.
Sexcentorum. D’Anville (Notice de la Gaule, p. 694) thinks that we ought to read here MD in place of DC (i. e., mille et quingentorum instead of sexcentorum), because the base of the mountain in question actually measures 1500 feet. The MSS. and early editions, however, are all the other way. Perhaps Ccesar means here, in place of the ordinary foot, the pace of two and a half feet, which would reconcile the text with the actual measurement.
Qua flumen intermittit. “ Where the river intermits,” i. e., breaks off from its circular course, and ceases to flow round the place. Ciacoonius thinks that we ought to read here qua a flu- mine intermittitur, because we have, in another part of these commentaries (7, 17), “ ad earn partem qua. intermissa a flumine et palude” and again (7, 23), “ intermissa trabes.” But all the MSS. give the received reading, and intermittitur is here employed m an intransitive sense. Consult Oudondorp, *d loc.t and Vechner, HtU lenalex, p. 59, scq.
Continet. “ Occupies,” i. covers, or fills up.—Contim
Digitized by GoogleTtOTKS ON THE FIRST BOOK.
gunl. u Touch it,** i. e., the bank. Supply eam, scil. rsjram. 22 Achaintre takes ripa for the nominative plural, agreeing with contingant, and makes radices the accusative, governed by this verb.
Our construction, which is the received one, is far preferable. By tt, rripo becomes the genitive and radices the nominative.
Hunc murus circumdatus, &c. “A wall thrown around it 23 makes a citadel of this mountain, and connects it with the town.” Compare the Greek paraphrast: rrir» Si rd Spms	*cp«nwfo/wftfr
rff nSXet w^tiyvwn, Kmi iKfimkiV	r»6r« iwepydQrnu.	The student
will take care not to make kune depend, in construction, on circum datus, as some recommend, for then the wall alone will form the citadel, and not the mountain! Some remains of the wall are still to be seen at the present day.
%. Nocturnis diumisqiu. The more usual order would have been diurnis noctumisquc, and Oudendorp actually adopts this in his smaller edition. But Caesar places nocturnis first in order here, as more stress is to be laid ufxm it in the idea that we are to form of his rapid movements on this occasion. Compare Ramshom, L.
G. p. .638, and Daehne, ad loo,
Ex per cunctatione, dec. “ From the inquiries of our men, and the statements of the Gauls and traders, who assured them,”
&c. Prodicebant here implies a positive assertion, made in order to impress another with a full belief of what we say.
Vultum. “ Their look.”—Aciem oculorum. “ The fierce expression of their eyes.” Compare the Greek paraphrast, r« Sea* mbrtSr bpdparm.
Tribunis militum. “ The tribunes of the soldiers.” These were officers in the Roman army, who commanded a part of the legion, generally a thousand men. They had also charge of the works and camp. There were six in every legion. Consult Archaeological Index.—Profectis. “ The prefects.” There were various kinds of profecti in the Roman army. Those here meant, however, are the prefects of the allies, who answered to the tribunes of the soldiers among the Roman troops;
Urbe. Rome.—Amicttio causa. These were the young nobility to whom Plutarch alludes {Vit. Cos. c. 19), and who, according to him, had entered into Caesar’s service only in hopes of living luxuriously and making their fortunes.
Quorum alius, &c.	“	One	of	whom	having	assigned	one	ex
cuse, another another, which they said made it necessary,” dec.
Vultum fingere. “ To command their countenance,” i. e..
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
preserve their countenance in its natural state, hide from view Urn fear which secretly influenced them.
Vulpa tolis castris, &c. “As a general matter, wills were made througnout the whole camp.” Soldiers most commonly made their wills by word of mouth, while girding themselves for battle, and such a wiH was called testamentum in procinctu factum. (Con suit Instil. Justiii. 1. 2, t. 2.) On the present occasion, however, their wills were formally made in writing, as appears from the literal meaning of obsignabantur, “ were sealed.”
 Magnum usum. “ Great experience.”—Centuriones.	A centurion commanded, when the legion was full, a hundred men, as the name itself imports. There were two in each maniple, and, consequently, six in each cohort, and sixty in each legion.
Quique equitatu praeerant. “ And those who were in command of the cavalry.” Exerdtu for exercitui, the old dative. The decuriones are here meant. Compare note 11, page 14.
Qui se ex his, &c.	“	Those	individuals	of	this latter class,
who wished themselves to be regarded as less timid than the rest of the army, declared that they did not dread the enemy, but feared the narrowness of the roads, and the extent of woods which intervened between themselves and Ariovistus, or else, with respect to the com, that it could not be supplied with sufficient readiness.” By his are meant those, “ qui magnum in castris usum habebant.” With rem frumentariam supply quod ad, and compare Perizomus, ad Sanct. Min. 2, 6.—Vol. i., p. 222, ed. Bauer.
Ut satis commode, &c. The conjunction ut, when joined in construction with a verb of fearing, such as timeo, metuo, &c., re- ouires in our idiom the addition of a negative; while ne, on the other hand, when similarly construed, has an affirmative force. Thus timeo ut facias, “ I am afraid you will not do it;” but timeo ne facias, “ I am afraid you will do it.” The explanation is as follows : Timeo ut facias is, literally, “ I am afraid, in order that you may do it,” i. e., I want you to do it, but am afraid you will not; and, on the other hand, Timeo ne facias is, literally, “I am afraid lest you may do it,” i. e., I do not want you to do it, but am afraid you will.
Signa ferri. “ The standards to be borne onward,” i. e. the troop* to march forward.—Dicto audientes. “ Obedient to the order.” According to Dio Cassius (38, 35), Caesar’s soldiers pronounced the war an unjust and unauthorized one, and alleged that it had been merely undertaken by their commander to gratify hisNOTES ON THB FIRST BOOK.
Pag».
own ambitious views. They threatened also to abandon him unless 23 he changed his intention of attacking the Germans.
Nec propter timorem signa laturos. “ And would not advance in consequence of their fear.”
1G. Convocato consilio. “ A council of war being called.” Dio Cassius states (38, 35) that Cesar would not call an assembly of the soldiers, from a well-grounded apprehension lest his troops might bieak forth into open tumult, and commit some act of violence.
Omniumque ordinum, &c.	“ And the centurions of all ranks
Im ing summoned to that council.” On this occasion, then, all the centurions in the army (there were sixty in each legion) were called to the council of war; whereas, on ordinary occasions, the council was composed of the commander-in-chief, the legati or lieutenants, the tribunes of the soldiers, and only the chief centurion of each legion.
Primum, quod, dec. “ In the first place, for presuming to think, that it was for them to inquire or deliberate, either in what direction or with what design they were to be led.” Literally*
“ because they thought that they must inquire,” dtc.
Postulatis. Compare chap. 36.—Aequitate. “ The fairness.’* 24
Aut cur de sua virtute, dec. “ Or why should they despair eiiher of their own valour or of his prudent activity 1”
Factum ejus hostis periculum, &c.	**	That a trial had been
xuade of this foe within the memory of our fathers,” i. e., in the days of our fathers. Compare the Greek paraphrast, hi rSv f/usrtpuv
Taripuv.
Factum etiam. Supply periculum.—Nuper. Fourteen years previous. — Servili tumultu. “During the insurrection of the slaves.” Literally, “during the servile tumult.” The Romans rpplied the word tumultus (a much stronger term than helium) to » war in Italy or an invasion of the Gauls. The allusion in the text is to the war of Spartacus the gladiator. (Consult Historical Index.) Among the gladiators and slaves, who flocked to the standard of this leader, were many of the German race, and hence the remark of Cesar.
Quos tamen, dec. “And yet these last the experience and dvjcipline, which they had received from us, assisted in some re spect.” Alluding to their training as gladiators.
Constantia. “ A firm and resolute spirit.”—Inermos. More in accordance with the usage of Cesar than inermes. At first the ins irgents were without arms to any great extent, and hence, from
A A
Digitized by * ogleNOTES ON T£E FIRST BOOK.
their being no badly furnished with them, they ere here called ** art»
armed.”
7 Suir. Referring to the territories of the Helvetii.—Ultntm. Referring to the Germans.
Adversum proelium et fuga Gallorum. Compare chap. 31.
Neque sui potestatem fecisset. *' Without having given them an opportunity of coming tp an engagement with him.” Facere potestatem sui means generally, “ to allow one’s self to be approached,” “ to allow access to,” Ac.
Ratione et consilio. “ By stratagem and cunning. ”—*• Cut rationi, Ac. “ That not even Ariovistus himself entertained any hope, that our armies could be ensnared by that same stratagem, for the exercise of which there had been room against a people barbarous and unskilled in warfare.”
Qui suum timorem, Ac. “That they, who ascribed then fear to a pretended alarm relative to provisions and the narrowness of the roads, acted presumptuously, since they appeared either to distrust the official qualifications of their commander, or to dictate unto him.”—Hcec sibi esse cures. “ That these things were a care to him,” i. e., that he had not neglected these things.
Brevi tempore judicaturos. “ Would soon have an opportunity of judging.”
Quod non fore, dec. “ That, as to the soldiers being reported to be about to disobey his orders,” Ac., i. e., as to the report which had reached him of the soldiers intending to disobey his orders.
>• Scire enim, Ac. “ For he knew, that either, in consequence of some mismanagement of an affair, fortune had failed those commanders with whom an army was not obedient to orders ; or else, that the charge of avarice had been fastened upon their characters, in consequence of some act of misconduct having been discovered.” —In place of conjunctam some read convictam, in the sense of “ aperte demonstratam,” as in Ovid (Met. 13,89) we have u farm convictus.” Compare Menken, Obs. L. L. p. 199.
Perpetua vita. “ Throughout the whole of his past life.”— Felicitatem. “ His good fortune.”
Itaque se, Ac. “ That he would, therefore, immediately do what he intended to have put off to a more distant day.” Repress sentare is a legal term, and denotes “ to do a thing before the time.” Thus a person is said solutionem repressentare, who pays the money before the day. It is from this general meaning that the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
mb alto obtains the signification of doing a thing immediately. 25 Colluturus is used here in the sense of dilaturus.
Decima, legions. The legions were called first, secondI, Ac., from the ocder in which they were raised.—Pratoriam cohortem.
“ A body gutfd.” Among the Romans, the general was usuajy attended by a select band, called cohors protons, so called, according to Festus, because it never left the commander, or, as he was called hi early Latin, the prmtor (i. e,, qui proit exercitui).
Princeps. In the sense of prima. Compare note 15, page 8.—Ei gratias egit. “ Returned thanks to him.”—Quod de se,
Ac. u For the very high opinion he had formed of them, and assured him,” Ac.
Primorum ordinum centuriones. “ The centurions of the first centuries,” i. e., the centurions of the first maniple of the Triarii, the centurions of the first maniple of the Principes, and the centurions of the first maniple of the HastatLr—uti Casari satisfacerent. “ Strove to excuse themselves to Caesar.”
Neque de summa bellt, Ac. “ Nor had thought, that any decision respecting the management of the war appertained to them, but to their commander,” i. e., nor had thought, that it was for them to decide upon the best mode of conducting the war, but rather for their general.
Satisfactions. “ Excuse.”—Itinere exquisito. “ The route haring been reconnoitred.”—Ut millium amplius, Ac. “ And found to be such, that, by means of a circuit of more than fifty miles, it would lead his army through an open country,” i. e., that, by taking a circuit of somewhat more than fifty miles, he might lead his army along it through an open counfry. The student will observe, that, in order to connect the clause ut ampUsts, dec., with itinere exquisito, a new verb must be introduced in translating, which is easily implied from the general force of the participle exquisito.
ft. Quinquaginta. Some read quadraginta. The Greek para- phrast ha* a number rery wide of the truth, namely, 1250 stadia, equivd'.en; to something more than 156 Roman miles.	ri
X&ta ltax6ffuz sal nrrjsevTa ardiieu
1J. Quod antea de colloquio postulasset, Ac. “ Stating, that, as o his previous demand respecting a conference, this might now bo carried into effect through his own means, since he had come nearer.”
11. Existimare. We have here given the reading of Oudendoip,
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK*
in place of existimaret? the common lection. So also licere m U» previous clause, instead of liceret.
12. Sanitatem. “A just way of thinking.” Literally, “a sound mind.” Compare the Greek paraphrast: oufpweT» o+rto h4fu$ev.
1. Alia ratione aerum esse venturum. “ That he would not come upon any other terms.”—Interposita causa tolli. “ To be thwarted by the interposing of any pretext,” i. e., to be thwarted on any pretence by Ariovistus.
Gallorum equitatui. The cavalry in Cesar’s army were all Gauls. He was afraid, therefore, lest, if attacked during the conference by the German horse, they might not prove a sufficient protection for his person. Many editions have equitatu, the old form of the dative.
Commodissimum esse statuit, &c. “ He deemed it most expedient, all their horses having been taken from the Gallic cavalry, to mount on them the legionary soldiers,” dtc. The adverbial form eo is equivalent here to in eos (scii, equos.) By the legionary soldiers are meant the regular troops of the legion, as distinguished from the velites.
Non inridicule. “ Not without some humour,” i. e., humorously enough. Compare the Greek paraphrast, iertiSv n iqBtyfa-n.
—Ei. “ For that legion.”
6. Nunc ad equum rescribere. “ Now enrolled them among the cavalry.” When soldiers were first enlisted they were said scribit their names being entered in the roll of the legion. If they were afterward transferred, from the corps into which they had been enrolled, to some other part of the service, they were said rescribi. The humour of the remark made on the present occasion consists in supposing, mat a regular promotion had taken place to the rank and pay of cavany. When the change of service was from the cavalry to the infantry, it was a military punishment; but, on the contrary, a military reward when the foot-soldier was transferred to the hone. For another explanation, consult Petit, Obs. 1, 6, and Gronovius, ad Senec. de Benef. 5, 6.
Tumulus terrenus satis grandis. “ A rising ground of considerable height.” Literally, ‘‘ a mound (or hill) of earth.”—Castris utrisque. Referring to the camp of Cesar and that of Ariovistus.
Ex equis. “ On horseback.” Compare the Greek form of
expression,	Imrwv.—Denos.	The Greek oaraphrast has at
Digitized by L.ooQLeNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Hans
it he read in his Latin MS. bvrtos in place of Struts. It is highly im* probable that only two would be brought to the conference on either side.
 Commemoravit.	“Recounted.”—Quod.	“How that.”-
Munera amplissima. It was customary, with the Romans, to send presents to those whom the senate had honoured with the title of king. Compare Liv. 30, 15.
Pro magnis hominum officiis. “ In return for important services on the part of individuals.”—Plum, cum neque aditum, dec.
That he (Ariovistus), although he had neither the means of deserving them, nor just cause to ask for them,” dec. Aditum non habere implies the absenco of a«iy services on the part of Ariovistus towards ti e Roman people. Compare the explanation given in the Index hatinitatis appended to the edition of Oberlinus: “ Aditum non habere ad aliquem, nullis mentis esse, ob qu® precari sustineas.”
Quam veteres, dec. “ What old and just causes of alliance existed,” dec. The Aedui were the first among the Gauls that embraced the friendship of the Romans. Compare Strabo (4, p.
192, ed. Cos.), OI Si *ESodoi sal ovyyevets fP«/iafotv uvopd^ovra, eat xp&roi tQv ratfrp xpoafjXdov rpds rfp QiXlav teal ovppaj(lav. So also Tacitus (Ann. 11, 25), “ Primi Aedui senatorum in urbe jus adepti sunt. Datum id foederi antiquo, et quia soli Gallorum fraternitatis nomen cum Populo Romano usurpant.” Consult also Diod. Sic. 5,25.
Ut omni tempore, dec. “ How the Aedui had ever enjoyed,” dec.	,
Sui nihil. “ Nothing of their own.” Equivalent to nihil sui 27 juris, auctoritatis, opum, or ditionis.—Auctiores esse. “ To be still farther advanced.”
Quod vero ad amicitiam, dec. “ Who then could bear to have that taken from them which they brought with them when they obtained the friendship of the Roman people 1” i. e., to see them robbed of what they possessed before they became the friends of the Roman people. Literally, “ for that to be taken from them which they had brought to the friendship,” dec.
Postulavit deinde eadem, dec. “ He then made the same demand which he had commissioned the ambassadors to make.”
De suis virtutibus multa pnzdicavit. “ He spoke much and boastfully about his own merits.”—Sed rogatum, dec. “ But on being requested and sent for by the Gauls,” i. e., by the Arverni and Sequani. Compare chapter 31.
A a 2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Ab tpsis. “ By^he Gauls themselves.—Stipendium caperc. “ That he exacted tribute.”
Omnes Gallice civitates. Exaggeration. Only the Aedui and their allies fought against him.
Idque sc, &c.	“	And	that	he	had	sought	it	with	this expec
tation.” Id here refers to the friendship of the Roman people. It would have been more perspicuous to have said earn, but the MSS. all give the other form.
Stipendium remittatur, &c.	“	The	tribute	due	him is to be
withheld, and those who have surrendered to him are to be withdrawn from their allegiance.”
Quod multitudinem, &c.	“	As	to	his	leading	a	multitude o!
Germans across the Rhine into Gaul.”
Sed defenderit. “ But had warded it off,” i. e., had acted merely on the defensive. Defendere is here taken in its primitive sense, as equivalent to propulsare. Compare B. C. 1, 7, “ Conr
clamant legionis XIIIqua aderat, milites	sese paratos esse
imperatoris sui tribunorumque plebis injurias defendere.”
Se prius in Galliam venisse, &c. Here again Ariovistus falsely defends his conduct. The Roman commander Domitius had conquered the Arvemi long before the German leader came into Gaul.
Quid sibi vellet ? &c. By sibi Caeear is meant, by suas pos
sessiones the possessions of himself, Ariovistus.—Provinciam suam, &e.	“	That	this part of Gaul was his province, just as that other
twas ours.” * The student will mark the force of the pronouns here. ftSic refers to jthe quarter where Ariovistus now is, illam to the distant Roman province in the south of GauL
Qui in sudjure, &c.	“	Since	w*e	interrupted	him	in	the en
joyment of -his lsqjht.*
Quod fratres, &c.	“	As	to	Caesar’s	saying	that	the	Aedui
had been styled brothers by the senate.”—Bello Allobrogum, <&c. The Dauphin editor is wrong in supposing that the war here meant is the one in which Domitius Aenobarbus and Fabius Maximus were employed against the Allobroges (Florus, 3, 2.) It is rather the one which Cneius Pontinus successfully waged against the same people.
AuxiUo Populi Romani, &c.	“	Had	derived	any	assistance
from the Roman people.”—Debere se suspicari, &c.	“	That	he
has strong reason to suspect that Caesar, having pretended friendship for the Aedui, inasmuch as he keeps an army in Gaul, keeps
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
it there, in fact, for the purpose of crushing him (Ariovistus),” i. e., 28 that Cesar, under the pretence of friendship towards the Aedui, merely keeps an army in Gaul to crush him, Ariovistus.
Qui nisi decedat. 44 That, unless he depart.” Qui for tile, as it begins a clause.
Quod si eum interfecerit, dec. It cannot be supposed, that this was a mere idle boas4; on the part of Ariovistus. Cesar already had at Rome many violent political enemies, who were eager for his destruction.—Gratum esse facturum. “ He would do an agreeable thing,” i. e., would be doing a favour to, dec.
Ejus morte redimere posset. 44 He could purchase by his (Cesar’s) death.”—Sine ullo ejus labore, dec. “ Without any trouble and hazard on his part.” Ejus again refers to Cesar.
Multa ab Casare, dec. 44 Many arguments were urged by Cesar to this effect, why, namely, be could not desist from his purpose,” i. e., to show why he could not, dtc.
Ignovisset. 44 Had pardoned.” The Romans were said 14 to pardon” a conquered people, when they allowed them to retain their freedom, to enjoy their own laws, and create their own magistrates. On the other hand, a state was said to be reduced to a Roman province, when it was deprived of its laws, and was sub- iected to the control of Roman magistrates, and to the payment of a certain tribute.
8. Quod si antiquissimum, dtc. 44 If, then, the most distant period ought to be regarded,” i. e., if the question was to turn upon the claims of earliest possession.—Si judicium senatus, dtc. ' “ If, on the other hand, the decision of the senate ought to bp takeni^**- * consideration, then was it right that Gaul should be free, since the> had willed that this country, after being conquered in war, show’ still enjoy its own laws.”	^	'
Ad nostros adequitare. With most of the compound vert the preposition may be repeated with its proper case. This is often done to impart strength to the expression. Compare the remarks of Perizonius, ad Sanct. Min. 3, 3.—Vol. i., p. 408, ed. Bauer.
Farit. We have adopted facit and recipit on the recom menu anon o. Oudendorp, although imperavit follows. This change of tense is elegant and frequent among the historical writers. Conr suit Oudendorp, ad loc.
Per fidem. 44 Under cover of plighted faith.” Compare the 29 explanation of Moms: 44 propter fidem datam et acceptam.” Some commentators, however, give ner in this clause the force of contra,
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
<29 relying upon the Greek paraphrast, fcX? b ry haXoyiorf 6*’ oM eivofloBmt. Per, however, has rather the force of contra in composition, as perfidus, perjurus, <fcc.
Posteaquam in vulgus militum, &c.	44	A,ier it was spread
abroad among the common soldiers.”—-Omm Gallia, &c.	44	Had
interdicted the Romans from all Gaul.”
Impetumque in nostros, &c. All the editions and MSS. have fecissent, which we have changed, nevertheless, to fecisse. As the text stands in the different editions, it cannot be correct. Some o\ the MSS. and earlier printed copies give ut before diremisset, but later editions rejected the conjunction until Davies restored it. As Clark, however, very correctly remarks, ut ought rather to be placed before fecissent; while, on the other hand, if it can be omitted before this verb, it can just as well be omitted before diremisset. In order to remove the difficulty, therefore, we have retained ut before diremisset, in the sense of quomodo, 44 how,” but have changed feci* sent to fecisse, so as to have a double construction in the same sentence. Translate as follows: 44 and that his cavalry had made an attack on our men, and how this circumstance had broken off the conference.” Oudendorp conjectures vi diremisset for ut diremisset.
Injectum est. “ Was infused.” The Greek version has b(<pv, which induced Wasse to conjecture innatum est for injectum est. {Add. ad Sail. p. 398.)
Neque perfectae essent. 44 And had not been brought to a conclusion.”—Uti aut, dtc. Supply et postulans.
Ex suis aliquem. The common text has ex suis legatis aliquem, but we have rejected legatis on the suggestion of Bentley. This emendation is supported also by the Greek version, which has merely, rtvi t&v iavroS.
Retineri tum poterant, &c.	44	Could	not	be	restrained	from
casting.”—Caium Valerium Procillum. Already mentioned in chapter 19.
Civitate donatus erat. 44 Had been presented with the rights of citizenship.” Foreigners, on whom this favour was conferred, prefixed to their own name the praenomen and nomen of the individual, through whose influence the privilege in question had been obtained, and regarded that person ever after as their patron. Thus Caburus, the father of Procillus, assumed the name of Caius Valerius Cahurus, having taken the first and second names of Caius Valerius Flaccus, his patron.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Qua multa jam, etc. “Of which Ariovistus now, from long 29 habit, made frequent use,” i. e., which he now spoke fluently.—
Ht quod in eo, etc. “ And because the Germans could have no motive to inflict any personal injury in his case.”
Qui hospitio Ariovisti, etc. “ Who had enjoyed the hospitality of Ariovistus,” i. e., was connected with him by the ties of hospitality. As the ancients had not proper inns for the accommodation of travellers, the Romans, when they were in foreign countries, or at a distance from home, used to lodge at the houses of certain persons, whom they in return entertained at their houses in Rome. This was esteemed a very intimate connexion, and was called hospitium, or jus hospitii.
Qua diceret Ariovistus. “ What Ariovistus might have to say.”—Conclamavit. “ He called out in a loud tone and demanded.”—An speculandi causal “Was it to act as spies 1” Liter ally, “ was it for the sake of spying 1”
Promovit. “He moved forward.” Compare the Greek xytbxlniot.—Postridie ejus diei. “ The day after that day,” i. e., the day following. Compare the Greek, rjj 6' hartpaif.—Prater • castra Casaris. “ Past Caesar’s camp.”
Ex eo die, &c.	“	For	five	successive	days	after	that	day.”—	30
Pro castris. “ Before his camp.”—Potestas. “ An opportunity n More literally, “ the means of so doing.”
Genus hoc erat pugna, &c.	“	The	following	was	the	kind	of
battle in which the Germans had exercised themselves,” i. e., to which they had trained themselves.
Quos ex omni copia, &c.	“	Whom	they	had	selected	from
the whole army, each horseman one, for his own protection.” Com pare Tacitus, Germ. c. 6.
Hi, si quid eraJt durius, etc. “ These, if anything occurred of more than ordinary danger, ran to their assistance.” Hi refers to the foot-soldiers.—Si qui. For si quis. — Circumsistebant. u Stood around to defend him.”
Longius. “ Farther than usual.”—Celerius. “With greater speed than ordinary.”
Exercitatione. “From constant practice.”—Ut jubis equo-
*um, &c.	“	That,	being	supported	by	the	manes	of	the	horses,
they could equal their speed,” i. e., could keep up with them.
Ne diutius commeatu, &c. It is a question for military men to docide, whether Caesar should have allowed Ariovistus to march past his camp, and cut off his communication with the quarter from
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
30 which his supplies were to come. It is probable that his object, id delaying a general action, was to accustom his men, in the mean while, by a succession of slight encounters, to the looks of so formidable a foe, as well as to their manner of fighting.
Acieque triplici instructa. “ And his army being drawn up In three lines.” Literally, “ a triple order of battle being arranged.” —Primam et secundam acietn, &c. “He ordered the first and second lines to remain under arms.” Compare Vegetius, 1, 26, “ Si hostis incumbat, tum omnes equites et media pars peditum ad pulsandum impetum ordinantur in acie ; reliqui post ipsos, ductis fossis, muniunt castra.”
Circiter hominum, &c.	“	Light	troops,	about sixteen thou
sand men in number.” The term expeditus refers to the celerity of their movements and the lightness of their equipments. Most commonly, however, in our author, it merely means unencumbered by baggage.
Partem auxiliorum, dtc. “ A part of his auxiliaries.” The forces sent by foreign states and monarchs were called auxilia.
Instituto suo. “According to his custom.” Institutum here refers to a custom or practice, in accordance with some settled resolution or design.
A majoribus. “From the larger one.” Supply castns. The larger camp was the one first pitched. Many MSS. and editions have castris expressed.
Prodire. “ Come forth to battle.”
32	1. Acriter utrinque, &c. Dio Cassius (38, 48) informs us, that
Ariovistus came near taking the camp of the Romans on this occasion : iktysv *«2 t6 xapAcvpa abnhf etXs. The xupdfcupm of Dio is the castra minora of Caesar. Dio adds, that the German leader, elated with his success, disregarded the predictions of the German females, and came to an action with Caesar.
Pratlio. “ In a general engagement.”
Matres familia. Tacitus (Germ. c. 8) states, that the ancient Germans believed there was something sacred and prophetio in the female sex, and that, therefore, they disdained not their advice, but placed the greatest confidence in them and their predictions. He speaks of Veleda and Aurinia in particular, as having been held in the highest veneration. The females among the Germans, who pretended to the gift of prophecy, were called Alrunm (i. e., Air an- nen). Muratori gives the name as Alrunna (vol. i., p. 370), and Jomandes, Alyrumna (de Reb. Get. c. 24). Compare Adelung, Gloss. Med. et Inf. Lot. vol. i., p. 183
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK
Sortibus it vaticijiatiombus.
usu. “ Advantageously.”
6. Non esse fas. “ That it was not the will of heaven.” Fas denotes what is in accordance with the divine law and the rules of religion.
Omnes alarios. “ All the auxiliaries.” The allies were called alarii from their being generally placed on the wings {ala) of an army when drawn up in order of battle.
Pro castris minoribus. “ Before the smaller-camp.”—Pro
hostium numero. “Considering the number of the enemy.”—Ut ad speciem, &c.	“	That	he might make use of the auxiliaries for
appearance,” i. e., to make a show with them.
Generatim. “By nations,” i. e., by tribes. Compare the Greek paraphrast: sari
Rhedis et carris. “ With chariots and wagons.” Both of these are Gallic terms. The rheda was a kind of four-wheeled chariot for travelling, and was introduced among, and much used by, the Romans also. The rheda appear to have carried the families of the Germans, the carri their baggage and provisions.
Eo. “ On these.”—Passis crinibus. “ With dishevelled locks.” Passis from pando. Most of the MSS. have manibus instead of crinibus, and the Greek paraphrast appears to favour this reading, since he has, rdf \tfpag rpdg rods <rrpan liras 6pey6^tvoi. But passis crinibus is the more usual form on such occasions. Perhaps, however, Caesar joined them both, passis manibus crimbusque, as in the 48th chapter of the 7th book.
Casor singulis legionibus, &c.	“ Caesar placed a lieutenant
*nd quaestor over each legion.”—Quastorem. The office of the provincial quaestor was, to see that provisions and pay were for nished to the army, to keep an account of all moneys expended, &c.
Eos. Referring to the lieutenants and quaestors.—A dextro cornu. “ From the right wing,” i. e., of his own army.—Minims firmam. “ Weakest.” Literally, “ least strong.”
Itaque hostes, dtc. “ And so suddenly an1 rapidly,” dec.
Rejectis pilis. “ Their javelins being flung aside.” Compare the Greek version, rd Sipara hvoppiipavrts.
Phalange facta. The German phalanx, as has i nady been remarked, was analogous to the Roman testudo, the men being in dose array, with their shields locked over their heads. (Compare note 2, page 15.) It will be observed, that as the Germans fought by nations, on this occasion* there was as many phalanxes as na-
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
lions, hence the use of phalangas, the plural form, in the next sentence.
Qui in phalangas, <&c. “Who leaped upon the phalanxes, and tore off with their hands the shields of the enemy, and wounded them from above,” i. e., they tore away the shields which the enemy held above their heads, and then stabbed downwards. The soldiers who did this, kept moving about on the top of the shields, which formed a kind of roof beneath them. Oppian, in speaking of the war-steed, makes it ascend with the chariot upon the top of such a testudo, a plate of which may be seen in Lipsius, Poliorc lib. 1, dial. 6, sub. fin.
A sinistro cornu. “ On the left wing.” The reference is to the army of the enemy. Their left was described above as , weakest.—A dextro cornu. Alluding again to the German army.
1. Equitatu. Old dative.—Expeditior. “ More disengaged,”
e., more at liberty. The Crassus here mentioned was the son of Marcus Crassus, and lost his life, along with his father, in the expedition against the Parthians. His movement on the present occasion gained the day for the Romans.
Neque prius, &c.	“	Nor	did	they	cease	to flee until,” dec.
Prius and quam are separated by tmesis.
Repererunt. The common text has petierunt, which appears to have arisen from reperierunt, a faulty reading in one of the MSS. Heinsius conjectured pepererunt, of which Bentley approves ; but the best MSS. Lave repererunt.
In his fuit Ariovistus. He died soon after in Germany, either of his wounds, or through ch* grin at his defeat. Compare B. G. 5, 29, “ Magno esse Germanis dolori Ariovisti mortem.M Plutarch says, that the number of killed in this battle amounted to eighty thousand.
6. Dua fuerunt, &c. The Germans in general, according to Tacitus (Germ. 18), had but one wife each. In the calse of theii chieftains, however, who were anxious to strengthen and enlarge their power by family alliances, more than one wife was allowed.
Duxerat. “ He had married.” Compare note 6, page 3. «—Utrceque in ea fuga perierunt. The common text has utroque in ea fuga periit. But the MSS. are the other way.
Filia. Nominative absolute, unless we understand erant. But this would be far less elegant.
Tris catenis vinctus. “ Bound with a triple chain.”—In ipsum Casarem incidit. “ Fell in with Caesar himself.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIRST BOOK.
Neque ejus calamitate, Ac. “ Nor had fortune at all diminished, by the sufferings of such a man, the great pleasure and rejoicing which prevailed.” More literally, “ taken away anything from so great pleasure and rejoicing.”
De se ter sortibus, Ac. “ That the lots had been thrice consulted respecting him.” Tacitus (Germ. 8) describes the German mode of divining by lots as follows : “ They cut a twig from a fruit- ree, and divide it into small pieces, which, distinguished by certain marks, are thrown promiscuously upon a white garment. Then the priest of the canton, if the occasion be public ; if private, the master of the family ; after an invocation of the gods, with his eyes lifted up to heaven, thrice takes out each piece, and, as they come up, interprets their signification according to the marks fixed upon them. It the result prove unfavourable, they are no more consulted on the same affair that day ; if propitious, a confirmation by omens is still required.”
Beneficio. “ By the favour.”
Quos Ubii. The common text has ubi in place of XJbit, and the advocates for the former insist that XJbii must be an erroneous reading, because the people of that name were too far removed from the seat of war. A singular specimen of critical acumen ! just as if the relative position of the Ubii and Suevi had anything to dc with the theatre of the war between Caesar and Ariovistus. A strong argument in favour of the reading Ubii may be obtained from the 37th chapter of this book, where the Treviri, the immediate neighbours of the Ubii, came to Caesar with the intelligence, that the Suevi were endeavouring to cross the Rhine in their vicinity. The Ubii, moreover, as appears from another part of these commentaries (4, 3), were old enemies of the Suevi. Davies, Clarke, Oudendorp, and many other editors, declare in favour of Ubii as a reading, which was first given by Rhenanus and Hotomannus on conjecture. The Greek paraphrast has also ol OMtot.
Proximi Rhenum. “ Next the Rhine,” i. e., on the banks of that river. There is an ellipsis here of the preposition ad. Compare Lucretius, 2, 134, “ Proxima sunt ad vireis principiorum.”
Duobus. The Helvetian and German. — Tempus anm. “The season of the year.”—Hibema. “ Winter-quarters.” The winter-quarters of the Romans were strongly fortified, and furnished, particularly under the emperors, with every accommodation like a city, as storehouses, workshops, an infirmary, Ac. Hence from them many towns in Europe are supposed to have had their origin ;
B b
Digitized by GoogleIn citeriorem Galliam. Gaul south of the Alps, or, the northern part of the Italian peninsula, otherwise called Cisalpine Gaul.—Ad conventus agendos. “To hold the assizes.” The governors of provinces generally devoted the summer to their military operations, and the winter to the civil part of their administration, which consisted in presiding over the courts of justice, hearing petitions, regulating taxes, dec.
Digitized by v^ooQleBOOK II
Cum isset C<esar, &c. Tho date is A. U. C. 697, in the 3^ r.on8ulship of Publius Cornelius Lentulus and Quintus Metelhis Nepos.—Crebri rumores. “Frequent reports.” Compare the GreeK version, ov^val ayye\tai.
Dixeramus. Compare book 1, chap. 1.—Conjurare. “Were combining,” i. e., were forming a confederacy.—Omni Gallia. Celtic Gaul is here meant, in contradistinction to Belgic.
Partim qui. “Some of whom.”—Ut. “As, on the one
hand.”—Ita Populi Romani, &c.	“	So,	on the other, they bore it
impatiently, that an army of the Roman people should winter in Gaul, and the thing begin to grow into a custom.” Literally,
“ should winter and grow old in Gaul.” Compare the explanation of Donatus, ad Terent, Hec. prol. v. 4, “ Inveterascerent, i. e., in consuetudinem venirent.”
Partim qui mobilitate, &c.	“ While others of them, from a
natural instability and fickleness of disposition, were desirous of a change of government,” i. e., were anxious for a revolution.
Ab nonnullis etiam. Supply sollicitarentur, referring still to
the Belgae.—Qui ad conducendos, &c.	“	Who	possessed	means
for luring troops.”
Eam rem consequi. “To effect that end,” i. e., to usurp governments.—In imperio nostro. “While we held the chief power in Gaul.”
In interiorem Gilliam. “Into inner Gaul.” Oudendorp prefers ulteriorem, the reading of several MSS., as more in accordance with the phraseology of Caesar. But interior, here, has precisely the same force as ulterior, with the additional advantage of its applying, with more force, to one who was to pass from northern Italy into farther Gaul, or, in otner frord*. penetrate into the interior.
Quintum Pedium. A grandson of Juba, aiater of Caesar Consult Historical Index.
Dat negotium Senonibus.	“	He directs the Senones.” More
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
rago.
35 literally, “he gives a commission. "—Uti cognoscant. “To ascer lain.”
Constanter. “Uniformly.”—Manus cogi. ‘ That bodies of troops were raising.”—Exercitum conduci. “ That an army was collecting.”
Proficisceretur. The con.mon text ha & duodecimo die before proficisceretur. As these words, however, arc wanting in most MSS., and as they are utterly at variance with the rapidity of movement which characterized the operations of Caesar, we have excluded them from our edition. Oudendorp conjectures primo die, or primo quoque die; Frotscher, propere. The Greek version has &s rdyurra Uvat. Most of the editors who retain duodecimo die enclose the words between brackets.
Celeriusque omnium opinione. “ And sooner thin any ex
pected.”—Qui proximi Gallice, &c.	“	Who	are	the	nearest of the
Belgae to Celtic Gaul.” Compare the Greek version: U irdvruv
t&p BfXywv n\rjaialTaroi ri}s FaXarlag obcovv-rtg.
30	1. Neque se cum Belgis, &c. “That they had neither agreed
with the rest of the Belgae,” i. e., entered into the confederacy along with them.
Germanosque. These are enumerated towards the close of chapter 4, namely, the Condrusi, Eburones, Caeresi, and Paemani.— Cis Rhenum. Referring to the southern bank of the Rhine, on which several of the German tribes had settled.
Furorem. “ The infatuation.”—Fratres consanguineosque suos. The Remi are here speaking of the Suessiones as “ brethren and kinsmen of their own.”—Potuerint. Still referring to the Remi.—His. Referring to the Belgae who had combined against the Roman power.
His. The pronoun now refers to the two ambassadors from the Remi.—Quantceque. “ And how powerful.”—Sic reperiebat “ He obtained this information.” Literally, “ he thus found.”
Magnosque spiritus in re militari. And great haughtiness in warlike matters.” Compare the explanation of Achaintre: “ Spiritus, i. e., sensus superbia ferociaque plenos.
Omnia se habere explorata. “ That they had all things accu
rately inquired into,” i. e., that they could give him accurate information.—Propinquitatibus, &c.	“	By	neighbourhood	and affinity.”
—Quantam multitudinem. “ What number of men.”
Posse conficere. “ Could raise.” Literally, “ could make
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
up.”—Electa millia sexaginta. “ Sixty thousand picked men.”— Imperium. 44 The management.” The control.
Divitiacum. Not to be confounded, of course, with Divitiacus the Aeduan chieftain. He held not only the Suessiones, but also the Ambiani under his sway, and from the country of the latter passed over into Britain. Casar is the only ancient writer that makes mention of this Gallic expedition into the island.
Galbam. Many suppose this name to be an error on the part of some copyist, both because Dio Cassius (39, 1) has *A&pd as the appellation of the monarch, in question, and also because Galba is a Roman family name. Bi t Suetonius informs us, that some in his time considered Galba to be a term of Gallic origin, signifying “corpulent” or “fat.” (Vit. Galb. 3.) Perhaps, therefore, Adra may have been the first part of the name, and Galba the latter.
Totius belli summam. 44 The direction of the whole war.” Compare the Greek version : Srt hytpu* arpanr/bg rdvnav tlptjuivf
tlTj.
Longissimeque absint. “And are very far distant.” These words have occasioned considerable trouble to the commentators. Julius Celsus, who for the most part gives the spirit, if he does not follow the very words, of Caesar, passes over them in silence. The Greek paraphrast has hxdruvs t8>v SfXydv, which is not true, since the Menapii are as remote, if not more so. Vossius, therefore, thinks that we must either reject the words in question, or read longissimeque ab omni cultu absint, or else must transfer them to the close of the chapter, and insert them after appellantur, as applying to the four German tribes that are enumerated last. Davies, however, is in favour of retaining the words where they are, and giving longissime absint the meaning merely ot valde remoti sint We have adopted his opinion, which is followed also by Achaintre and Lemaire.
Ccercesos. Traces of this name appear to exist in that of the modern river Chiers, and of the Pamani in that of Famenne or Famine. Compare D'AnviUe, Not. de la Gaule, p. 188.
Liberalitcrque oratione prosecutus. “And having spoken kindly to them.” Compare B. G. 4, 18, “ Quibus pacem et amiti tiam petentibus liber aliter respondit.” So also B. C. 3, 104. B. Alex. 71. The Greek version has ftXofpovriedpivof, which amounts to the same thing.
4 .Ad diem. 44 By the day appointed.”—Magno opere. “ Strerv B b 2
Digitized by280
Ps#e.
uously.” The more correct form for magnopere. So quinto ojiere for quantopere. Compare Oudendorp, ad loc.
Quanto opere, &q.	“	How much it concerns the republic and
the general safety, that the forces of the enemy be prevented from uniting.” Literally, “ be kept apart.” Compare Lucretius, 5, 204, “Et mare, quod late terrarum distinet oras” where distinet is equivalent, as Davies well remarks, to a se invicem dividit. The terms rex publicet have reference to Rome, and communis salutis to the Remi. The army of the Gauls would amount, when united, to 300,000 men, to oppose which Caesar had, at farthest, but 60 or
It was all important, therefore, to prevent a junction.
Atque ibi castra posuit. For an account of the Roman camp consult Archaeological Index.
Qua res. “ This position.”—Post eum. Referring to Caesar. Ciacconius, not understanding to what eum could here refer, changed it into ea. Davies, however, restored the true reading, although he himself errs in referring eum to exercitum.
Cohortibus. As there were ten cohorts in a legion, the number of men would range from 420 to 600, according to the size of the legion itself. Consult Archaeological Index.
Duodeviginti pedum. “ Of eighteen feet,” i. e., in breadth. Supply in latitudinem. Stewecchius (ad Veget. 3, 8) thinks that we ought to read here XIX. instead of XVIII., in consequence of the rule which Vegetius lays down respecting an uneven number: “ imparem enim numerum observare moris est.” Caesar, however, followed his own rules. The Greek paraphrast makes the ditch 18 feet deep : TatpptSftari SI dsTtaxalSeKa rb fiddos-
Munire jubet. Supply suos. The more usual, but less elegant, form would be muniri jubet. All military writers who allude to the position of Caesar on the present occasion, speak of it in high terms of praise.
Ex itinere. “On their march.” Compare the Greek ver
sion lv rfi 66$.—Sustentatum est. “ The attack was supported.”— Galiorum eadem atque, &c.	“ The manner of attack on the part
of the Gauls, as well as the Belgae, is as follows.”
»• Testudine facta. “A testudo being formed.” To form a testudo, the soldiers joined their shields above their heads, and those on tne hanks iocKed theirs so as to defend their sides. This was done in order to secure themselves against the darts of the enemy, and from ns resemblance to the form of a testudo, or “ tortoise,” it derived its mintary name. Under cover of this they came up to
GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOR.
the gates, and tried either to undermine the walls or to scale them. Consult Archaeological Index.
Portas succedunt. That succedere is joined to an accusative as well as dative, is shown by Servius, ad Virg. Eclog. 5, 6, from Sallust, “ Cum murum hostium successisset.” Consult Ouden- dorp, ad loc.
In muro consistendi, &c. “The power of standing on Oie wall was to no one,” i. e., no one was able to stand on the-wall.
Summa nobilitate, &c.	44	Of	the	highest	rank and influence
among his countrymen.”—Pmcrat.	“	Was	over,” i. e., had the
command of, or was governor of.
Submittatur. Some of the MSS. have the simple mittatut, but submittatur is preferable, as it denotes the sending secretly and unobserved by the foe.
De media nocte. “ Soon after midnight.”—Iisdem ducibus,
&c.	“ Having used for guides the same persons who had come as
messengers from Iccius.”
Numidas. The Numidians were ranked among the light- armed troops. (Compare chapter 10.) The Cretans were remark able for their skill in archery. Compare Aelian, V. H. 1, 10, 05 Kp>)rt( tfol to^ixUiv dyadol. The inhabitants of the Balearic islands (Majorca and Minorca) were excellent slingers. Consult Geographical Index, s. v. Numidia, and Baleares.
Quorum, odwestt, &c.	44	By	the	arrival	of	whom, both courage
to ward olf the attack, together with the hope of a successful defence, was added to the Remi, and, for the same reason, the expectation of making themselves masters of the town departed from tho enemy,” i. e., the Remi were inspired with fresh courage, and with the hope of finally beating off the enemy, while the latter, on their part, now despaired of accomplishing their object.
Quos. In the masculine as the worthier gender, but referring, m fact, to both vicis and cedifidis. The construction of adire with an accusative is of common occurrence.
Omnibus topiis. Without the preposition cum, as in chapters 19 and 33. The preposition, however, is more commonly added.
Et ah millibus, &c. “And encamped within less than two miles of him.”
Et propter eximiam, &c.	44	And	on	account of their high
leputation for valour.”—Prcelio supersedere. “Todefer a battle.”
Solicitationibus periclitabatur. “ Strove to ascertain by fro-
Digitized by GoogleROTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
33 quent trials.” Solicitatiot.'bus is here equivalent m.fatt to lembus
prahis.
Adversus. “ Towards the enemy,” i. e., on the side facing the enemy.—Quantum lociy 6cc. “ As far as our army, when drawn up in line of battle, was able to occupy.”
Ex utraque parte, &c.	“ Had a steep descent on both sides *
laterally, “ had descents of side on cither part.” Dejectus is here used fOT*dejectio. Compare Livy, 9, 2, “ Angustias septas dejectu arborum saxorumque ingentium objacente mole invenerunt.”
Et frontem leniter fastigatus, &c. “And in front, gently sloping, sank gradually to the plain.” Fastigatus is properly applied to what has a pyramidical form, and terminates in a slender or spiral top. It here refers, however, merely to the descent or slope of the hill. With frontem supply quoad.
Ad extremas fossas. “At the extremities of the ditch,” i e., at each end.—Tormenta. “ Military engines,” i. e., Catapultst, and Balista, for throwing large stones, heavy javelins, &c. These would be analogous to our modem batteries.
3Q 1. Quod tantum, &c. “Since they could do so much by their numbers,” i. e., were so powerful in numbers. — Pugnantes. “ While engaged in the fight.”
Si qua opus esset. “ If there should be need in any quarter.” With qua supply parte. Some editions have si quid, others si quo. The Greek paraphrast has <? n iiov eirj.
Palas non magna. “ A marsh of no large size.”
Expectabant. “ Waited to see.”—Ut impeditos, 6cc. “ Wei® ready under arms to attack them in their disorder,” i. e., while more or less embarrassed in their movements by the attempt to cross. Compare the Greek paraphrase : ap<f>\ rodro d<rxo>ov/*{yocf.
Secundiore equitum, 6cc. “ The battle of the cavalry proving more favourable to our men,” i. e., our men having the advantage in the battle of the horse. The common text hao equitum nostrorum, which savours of a gloss.
6 Demanstratim est. Compare chapter 5.
Si minus potuissent. “ In case they should no: be able tc do this.”—Ad bellum gerendum. “ For carrying on the war.”—Pro* Mberentque. “ And might cut off.”
Levis armatura Numidas. These were armed merely with javelins, and, instead of a buckler, merely extended a part of their attire with their left hand. Compare the graphic description of Uvy (35, 11), “Nihil primo aspectu contemptius. Equi hcm;
Digitized by (googleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
nesque paulluli et graciles: discinctus et inermis eques, prater- 39 quam quod jacula secum portat : equi sine franis: deformis ipse cursus, rigida cervice et extento capite currentiumSo also Clau- dian, Bell. Gild. 15, 435, seq.
“ Non contra clypeis tectos, gladiisque micantes	‘
Ibitis, in solis longe fiducia telis:
Exarmatus erit, quum missile torserit, hostis.
Dextra movet jaculum, pratentat pallia lava,
Catera nudus eques.”
Impeditos. “ Embarrassed in their movements.” Compare iote 6, page 53.
Audacissime. Plutarch’s language is at variance with this, since he makes the Gauls to have fought badly. (Vit. Cos. c. 20), aloyp&s iyuvicafiivovs.
Oppido. Referring to Bibrax.—Se fefellisse. “Had disappointed them.”
Quorum in fines. “Into whosesoever territories ”—Suis. Referring to the respective territories of each.
Et domesticis copiis, &c. “And might avail themselves of ^() the supplies of provisions which they each had at home.” Domesticis copiis is here put for domestica copia.
Hac quoque ratio. “ The following consideration also.”— Divitiacum atque Aeduos, &c. They had done in conformity with the request of Caesar. Compare chapter 5.
His. Referring to the Bellovaci. They were desirous of returning home, and defending their territories against the threatened attack of the Aedui.
Nullo certe ordine neque imperio. “In no fixed order and under no regular command,” i. e., in no order and under no disci pline.
Cum sibi, &c.	“	Each	striving	to	obtain	the	foremost	place
on the route.”—Consimilis. “ Very like.” Consimilis is stronger in meaning than similis, and not merely a more sonorous term (vox sonantior),ss Forcellini maintains.
Insidias veritus. Caesar feared an ambuscade, because very little acquainted with the country Compare Dio Cassius, 39, 2,
Ktiioap 6e fioBtro pev rb yiyvdpevo*, oilc irdXprjae 6e o<f>as ev0i>(, Ayvotf t&b ywptiiy,
Cum ab extremo agmine, &c.	“	While	those	in	the	rear,
with whom our men first came up, made a stand,” See.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
40	8. Perturbatis ordinibus. “ Having broken their ranks.”—Pr<&*
sodium. “ Their safety.”
Quantum fuit diei spatium. “ As the length of the day allowed.” More literally, “ as much as there was space of day.”
Destiterunt. Supply interjicere. The later editions have destiterunt sequi, an inferior reading.
Ex itinere. “On his way,” i. e., on the line of march — Paucis defendentibus. “ Although only a few defended it,” i. t., although the garrison was weak.
Vineas agere. “ To move forward the vinea.” The vinea were mantlets or sheds, under which the besiegers worked the battering ram, or else approached the walls to undermine them. Consult Archaeological Index.
4 ]	1. Aggere jacto. “ A mound being thrown up.” The agger
was a mound or rampart composed of earth, wood, hurdles, and stones, which gradually increased in height towards the town, until it either equalled or overtopped the walls. Towers were erected on it, from which the soldiers threw darts or stones on the besieged by means of engines. Consult Archaeological Index.
Turribusque constitutis. “ And towers being erected on it.” The Romans had two kinds of military towers, those that were erected on the mound, and which are here meant, and those that were built at some distance from the besieged place, and were moved up to it on wheels. Consult Archaeological Index.
Operum, “ Of the works.” Referring to the agger, turres, &,c.—Celeritate. “ The despatch.”—Impetrant. “ They obtain this,” i. e., that their lives should be spared.
Galbae. Consult note 9, page 36.—Duxit. We have here given the reading of Oudendorp’s smaller edition. The Bipout editor gives ducit, on the authority of several MSS., which is also followed by Daehne and others.
Bratuspantium. Scaliger and others think that this town was the same with Caesaromagus, now Beauvais. But D’Anville is more correct in making it correspond to Bratuspante, an old place that once stood near Breteuil in Picardie. (D'AnviUe, Geogr. Anc. vol. i., p. 84.)
Majores natu. “The aged men,” or, those advanced in years/ Literally, “ those greater (i. e., farther advanced) by birth.”
Passis manibus.	“ With outstretched hands.” Passis is
from pando. Compare the Greek paraphrase : ivarerapbais rdit yspeh.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Ad eum. Referring to Caesar.—Facit verba. 4 Speaks.” 4 j Literally, “makes words,” i. e., a discourse. Verba habere is
* to hold a conversation with one but verba dare, “ to impose upon a person.”
In fide atque amicitia, &c.	“	Had always been steady in
their attachment and friendship to the state of the Aedui.”—Qui dicerent. “ Who had assured them.”—Omnes indignitates, dec.
“ All manner of indignities and insults.”
Qui hvjus, &c. The order is, (Eos), qui fuissent principes hujus consilii, profugisse in Britanniam, quod intelligerent, &c.— Principes. 44 The authors.” The prime movers.
Non solum Bellovacos. 44 That not only the Bellovaci themselves.”—Pro his. “ In behalf of these.”— Ut utatur. 44 To ex ercise,” i. e., to extend.
Quorum auxiliis, dec. “By whose aid and resources they (i. e., the Aedui) were accustomed, in case any war broke out, to support them,” i. e., to support whatever wars happened to occur. Quorum refers to the Belg®.
Honoris Divitiaci, dec. “ Out of respect for Divitiacus and the Aedui.” Literally, “ for the sake of the honour of Divitiacus and the Aedui.”
His traditis. “These hostages having been delivered.” Supply obsidibus.
Nihil pati vim, dec. Athenaeus informs us, on the authority of Posidonius, that the wealthier Gauls were accustomed to drink the wines of Italy and Massilia, and these, too, unmixed. (Ath. Deipnos. 4, 36.—Vol. ii., p. 94, ed. Schweigh.)
Ad luxuriam pertinentium. These words are wanting in many MSS., but they are rendered by the Greek paraphrast, and are also given by Celsus.
Increpitare et incusare. 44 That they inveighed against and complained of.”—Patriamque virtutem projecissent. 44 And had abandoned the bravery of their fathers.” More literally, “had thrown away.”
Confirmare. 44 That they resolutely declared.”
Sabim flumen. Achaintre and Lemaire charge Caesar with an error in geography here, and maintain, that, instead of Sabim, we ought to read either Samaram, or else Scaldim, more probably the latter. Their argument appears to be a plausible one.
Adventum. “ The coming up.”NOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
rage.
8- Mulieres, quique, &c. The order is, “ conjecisse mulieres, bomines^ue qui per atatem viderentur inutiles ad pugnam,'' &c.
Eorum dierum, &c.	“	The	mode	of	marching,	on	the	part of
sur army, during those days, having been carefully observed by them.” More literally, “ the custom of those days, in respect o 1 the march of our army.” As regards the construction of the genitive here, compare note 10, page 17. — Perspecta. Davies has edited prospecta, which is quite inappropriate.
Neqve esse quicquam negotii.	“	And	that	there	would be
no difficulty.” More literally, “ and that it was no labour.”
Hanc sub sarcinis adoriri. “In attacking this under its baggage,” i. e., “in falling "pon the soldiers of this legion while each of them was still bearing his load of baggage.” By impedi menta are meant the heavier articles of baggage, such as tents, &c., whereas sarcirue denotes the load which each soldier carried. The impedimenta were conveyed along by beasts of burden and wagons, but the sarcinee formed part of the burden of each soldier. The load which each of them carried is almost incredible ; provisions for fifteen days, sometimes more, usually corn, as being lighter, sometimes dressed food; utensils, such as a saw, basket, mattock,
. an axe, a reaping hook and leathern thong, a chain, a pot, &c., stakes, usually three or four, sometimes twelve, &c., the whole amounting to sixty pounds, not including the weight of his arms, for a Roman soldier considered these last, not as a burden, but as a part of himself. Under this load they commonly marched twenty miles a day, sometimes more. Compare Cic. Tusc. Quasi. 2, 37.
Qu*. Supply legione.—Reliquat. Supply legiones.
Adjuvabat etiam, &c.	“	It	added	weight	also	to	the advice
of those who brought this intelligence, that the Nervii from early times,” &c.
3 Ei rei student. “ Do they pay much attention to this,” i. e., to the raining of cavalry.—Sed quicquid possunt, &c. “But whatever they are able to do they effect by means of their foot* forces.” With valent supply efficere.
4. Incisis atque inflexis. “ Being cut in and bent,” i. e., being half cut, so that they still continued to grow, the trees were then bent longitudinally, and their branches assumed a lateral direction.
6. Crebris in latitudinem, &c.	“	Numerous	branches,	and briers,
and thoms intervening iff a lateral direction.” The branches are those of the young trees mentioned in the previous note. The ini* tervals between these were filled up with briers and tnoms, which
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
ml irmmgled, as they grew, with the boughs of the trees, and foe 43 whole formed an impervious kind of hedge, which answered all the purposes of a regular fortification. The common text has enatis after ramis, which Oudendorp and others reject very properly as a mere gloss. It does not appear in the best MSS.
Non modo. Put for non modo non. This ellipsis is of frequent occurrence. Compare B. G. 3, 4, and consult Sonet. Min. vol. ii., p. 293, ed. Bauer.
Non omittendum, &c.	“	That	they ought not to neglect the
advice which had been given them.”
Quern locum. This species of repetition has already been al luded to. Compare note 7, page 4.
Ab summo ccqualiter declivis. “ Sloping with a regular descent from the summit.”—Collis nascebatur, &c. “Another hill arose, over against and facing this,” i. e., directly opposite. The two epithets adversus and contrarius, being nearly analogous, are used to impart additional force to the expression.
Passus circiter ducentos, &c.	“ Having the lower part clear
and open for the space of about two hundred paces.” In order to convey the true meaning of apertus here, we have rendered it by a double epithet. The literal meaning of the clause is, “ open as to the lowest parts,” infima being put for quod ad infima loca.
Silvestris. “ So woody.” Supply ita. The Greek para- phrast has SfvSpwSes paXiora.
. 12. In aperto loco. Referring to the lower part of the hill, where there were no trees.—Secundum flumen. “ Along the river.” - Stationes equitum. “ Troops of horse on guard.”
Ratio ordoque, &c.	“	The	plan and order of the march was
different from what the Belgae had mentioned to the Nervii.” More literally, “ had itself otherwise than the Belgae had mentioned,” &c.
Expeditas. “Free from all encumbrance,” i. e., who had laid aside the load of baggage which each soldier was accustomed to tarry on the march. Compare note 11, page 42.
Duce legiones. “ The two legions.”—Totum agmen clou, debant. “ Closed the whole line of march,” i. e., brought up the rear.
Identidem. “ From time to time,” i. e., every now and then.
Quem ad finem. “As far as.”—Porrecta ax loca aperta. u The clear and open ground.” Porrecta literally refers to what Btretches out in front, and is free from any obstacle or impediment.
18 Opere dimenso. “The work having been measured out,
C c
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON Tiri: SECOND BOOK.
35 literally, “he gives a commission.’'—Uti cognoscant. “To ascer tain.”
Constanter. “Uniformly.”—Manus cogi. ‘ That bodies of troops were raising.”—Exercitum conduci. “ That an army was collecting.”
Proficisceretur. The con.mon text has duodecimo die before proficisceretur. As these words, however, aro wanting in most MSS., and as they are utterly at variance with the rapidity of movement which characterized the operations of Caesar, we have excluded them from our edition. Oudendorp conjectures primo die, or primo quoque die; Frotschcr, propere. The Greek version has u* rdyicra Uvat. Most of the editors who retain duodecimo die enclose the words between brackets.
Celeriusque omnium opinions. “ And sooner than any ex
pected.”—Qui proximi Gallice, &c.	“	Who	are	the nearest of the
Belgae to Celtic Gaul.” Compare the Greek version: U irdvruv
T&v BfXywv n^rjatalraTOi rfjs TaXanag oIkovvtss.
3g 1. Neque se cum Belgis, &c. “That they had neither agreed with the rest of the Belgae,” i. e., entered into the confederacy along with them.
Gcrmanosque. These are enumerated towards the close of chapter 4, namely, the Condrusi, Eburones, Caeresi, and Paemani.— Cis Rhenum. Referring to the southern bank of the Rhine, on which several of the German tribes had settled.
Furorem. “ The infatuation.”—Fratres consanguincosque suos. The Remi are here speaking of the Suessiones as “ brethren and kinsmen of their own.”—Potuerint. Still referring to the Remi.—His. Referring to the Belgae who had combined against the Roman power.
His. The pronoun now refers to the two ambassadors from the Remi.—Quantceque. “ And how powerful.”—Sic reperiebat “ He obtained this information.” Literally, “ he thus found.”
Magnosque spiritus in re militari. il And great haughtiness in warlike matters.” Compare the explanation of Achaintre : “ Spiritus, i. e., sensus superbia ferociaque plenos.
Omnia se habere explorata.	“	That	they	had	all things accu
rately inquired into,” i. e., that they could give him accurate infor- nation.—Propinquitatibus, &c.	“	By	neighbourhood	and affinity.”
—Quantam multitudinem. “ What number of men.”
Posse conficere. “Could raise.” Literally, “could make
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
op.”—Electa milha sexaginta. “ Sixty thousand picked men.”— Imperium. “ The management.*’ The control.
Divitiacum. Not to be confounded, of course, with Divitiacus the Aeduan chieftain. He held not only the Suessiones, but also the Ambiani under his sway, and from the country of the latter passed over into Britain. Caesar is the only ancient writer that makes mention of this Gallic expedition into the island.
Galbam. Many suppose this name to be an error on the part of some copyist, both because Dio Cassius (39, 1) has *A&pd as the appellation of the monarch, in question, and also because Galba is a Roman family name. Bi t Suetonius informs us, that some in his time considered Galba to be a term of Gallic origin, signifying “corpulent” or “fat.” (Vit. Galb. 3.) Perhaps, therefore, Adra may have been the first part of the name, and Galba the latter.
Totius belli summam. “ The direction of the whole war.” Compare the Greek version : Bn f/yep&v sal arpar^yOj xdvuav tlprjuivos
titj.
Longissimeque absint. “And aro very far distant.” These words have occasioned considerable trouble to the commentators. Julius Celsus, who for the most part gives the spirit, if he does not follow the very words, of Caesar, passes over them in silence. The Greek paraphrast has la^driAjg Df>y<2v, which is not true, since the Menapii are as remote, if not more so. Voasius, therefore, thinks that we must either reject the words in question, or read longissimeque ab omni cullu absint, or else must transfer them to the close of the chapter, and insert them after appellantur, as applying to the four German tribes that are enumerated last. Davies, however, is in favour of retaining the words where they are, and giving longissime absint the meaning merely ot valde nemoti sint We have adopted his opinion, which is followed also by Achaintre and Lemaire.
Ccerasos. Traces of this name appear to exist in that of the modem river Chiers, and of the Paemani in that of Famenne or Fa- mine. Compare D'AnviUe, Not. de la Gaule, p. 188.
Liber aliter que oratione prosecutus. “And having spoken kindly to them.” Compare B. G. 4, 18, “ Quibus pacem et ami- citiam petentibus liber aliter respondit.” So also B. C. 3, 104. B. Alex. 71. The Greek version has <pt\o<ppovr]odiievo(, which amount* to the same thing.
 Ad diem. “ By the day appointed.”—Magno opere. “ Strerv-
Db 2NOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
uously.” The more correct form for magnopere. So qu into ojere for quantopere. Compare Oudendorp, ad be.
Quanto opere, &q.	“	How much it concerns the republic and
the general safety, that the forces of the enemy be prevented from uniting.” Literally, “ be kept apart.” Compare Lucretius, 5, 204, “ Et mare, quod late terrarum distinet oras” where distinet is equivalent, as Davies well remarks, to a se invicem dividit. The terms ret publico, have reference to Rome, and communis salutis to the Remi. The army of the Gauls would amount, when united, to 300,000 men, to oppose which Caesar had, at farthest, but 60 or
It was all important, therefore, to prevent a junction.
Atque ibi castra posuit. For an account of the Roman camp consult Archaeological Index.
Quaeres. “ This position.”—Posteum. Referring to Caesar. Ciacconius, not understanding to what cum could here refer, changed it into ea. Davies, however, restored the true reading, although he himself errs in referring eum to exercitum.
Cohortibus. As there were ten cohorts in a legion, the number of men would range from 420 to 600, according to the size of the legion itself. Consult Archaeological Index.
Duodeviginti pedum. “Of eighteen feet,” i. e., in breadth. Supply in latitudinem. Stewecchius (ad Veget. 3, 8) thinks that we ought to read here XIX. instead of XVIII., in consequence of the rule which Vegetius lays down respecting an uneven number: “ imparem enim numerum observare moris est.” Caesar, however, followed his own rules. The Greek paraphrast makes the ditch 18 feet deep : Ta<Pptvftari Si SKTuncalSuca rd @d8o$.
Munire jubet. Supply suos. The more usual, but less elegant, form would be muniri jubet. All military writers who allude to the position of Caesar on the present occasion, speak of it in high terms of praise.
Ex itinere. “ On their march.” Compare the Greek ver
sion h rfi 66$.—Sustentatum est. “ The attack was supported.”— Gallorum eadem atque, &c.	“ The manner of attack on the part
of the Gauls, as well as the Belgae, is as follows.”
1 Testudine facta. “A testudo being formed.” To form a testudo, the soldiers joined their shields above their heads, and those on tne hanks roc Red theirs so as to defend their sides. This was done in order to secure themselves against the darts of the enemy, and from ns resemblance to the form of a testudo, or “ tortoise,” it derived its military name. Under cover of this they came up t«
Digitized by v^ooQleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
the gates, and tried either to undermine the walls or to scale them. Consult Archaeological Index.
Portas succedunt. That succedere is joined to an accusative as well as dative, is shown by Servius, ad Virg. Eclog. 5, 6, from Sallust, “ Cum murum hostium successisset.” Consult Ouden- dorp, ad loc.
In muro consistendi, &c.	“	The	power	of	standing	on	tne
wall was to no one,” i. e., no one was able to stand on the-wall.
Summa nobilitate, &c.	“	Of	the	highest	rank	and	influence
among his countrymen.”—Prceerat. “Was over,” i. e., had the command of, or was governor of.
Submittatur. Some of the MSS. have the simple mittatur , but submittatur is preferable, as it denotes the sending secretly and unobserved by the foe.
De media nocte. “ Soon after midnight.”—Iisdem ducibus,
&c.	“ Having used for guides the same persons who had come as
messengers from Iccius.”
Numidas. The Numidians were ranked among the light- armed troops. (Compare chapter 10.) The Cretans were remark able for their skill in archery. Compare Aeltan, V. H. 1, 10, Ol Kpirns elal Tofatifiv i.yaQoi. The inhabitants of the Balearic islands (Majorca and Minorca) were excellent slingers. Consult Geographical Index, s. v. Numidia, and Baleares.
Quorum odvoult, dec. “ By the arrival of whom, both courage to ward off the attack, together with the hope of a successful defence, was added to the Remi, and, for the same reason, the expectation of making themselves masters of the town departed from tho enemy,” i. e., the Remi were inspired with fresh courage, and with the hope of finally beating off the enemy, while the latter, on their part, now despaired of accomplishing their object.
Quos. In the masculine as the worthier gender, but referring, m fact, to both vicis and adificiis. The construction of adire with an accusative is of common occurrence.
Omnibus topiis. Without the preposition cum, as in chapters 19 and 33. The preposition, however, is more commonly added.
EtaJb millibus, &c. u And encamped within less than two miles of him.”
Et propter eximiam, &c.	**	And	on	account	of	their high
leputation for valour.”—Prcdio supersedere. “ To defer a battle.”
Solicitationibus periclitabatur. “ Strove to ascertain by fro-
Digitized by GoogleROTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
n|€.
gjj quent trials.” Solicitation'bus is here equivalent in.fact to lembus
pmliis.
Adversus. “ Towards the enemy,” i. e., on the side facing
the enemy.—Quantum loci, &c.	44	As	far as our army, when drawn
up in line of battle, was able to occupy.”
Ex ulraque parte, &c. 44 Had a steep descent on both sides ** Literally, 44 had descents of side on cither part.” Dejectus is here used for+dejectio. Compare Livy, 9, 2, 44 Angustias septas dejectu arborum saxorumque ingentrum objacente mole invenerunt.”
Et frontem leniter fasligatusy &c.	44	And	in	front, gently
sloping, sank gradually to the plain.” Fastigatus is properly applied to what has a pyramidical form, and terminates in a slender or spiral top. It here refers, however, merely to the descent or slope of the hill. With frontem supply quoad.
Ad extremas fossas. 44 At the extremities of the ditch,” i e., at each end.—Tormenta. 44 Military engines,” i. e.. Catapultee% and Balistce, for throwing large stones, heavy javelins, &c. Theso would be analogous to our modern batteries.
1	Quod tantum, &c. 44 Since they could do so much by their
numbers,” i. e., were so powerful in numbers. — Pugnantes. 44 While engaged in the fight.”
Si qua opus esset. 44 If there should be need in any quarter.” With qua supply parte. Some editions have si quid, others si quo. The Greek paraphrast has i? n Sfov tlrj.
Palas non magna. 44 A marsh of no large size.”
Expeetabant. 44 Waited to see.”—Ut impeditos, &c. 44 Wei • ready under arms to attack them in their disorder,” i. e., while more or less embarrassed in their movements by the attempt to cross. Compare the Greek paraphrase : afi<f>l rotiro a<rxo>ovpfvotf.
Secundiore equitum, &c.	44	The	battle of the cavalry proving
more favourable to our men,” i. e., our men having the advantage in the battle of the horse. The common text hao equitum nostrorum, which savours of a gloss.
0 Demonstratum est. Compare chapter 5.
Si minus potuissent. 44 In case they should no. be able to do this.”—Ad bellum gerendum. 44 For carrying o.i the war.”—Prth kiberentque. 44 And might cut off.”
Levis armatura Numidas. These were armed merely with javelins, and, instead of a buckler, merely extended a part of their attire with their left hand. Compare the graphic description oI Livy (35, 11), “Nihil primo aspectu contemptius. Equi hom;
Digitized by CjOOQleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
nesque pauUvli et graciles: iis cinctus et inermis eques, prater- 3CJ quam quod jacula secum portat : equi sine frcenis: deformis ipse cursus, rigida cervice et extento capite currentium.” So also Clau- dian, Bell. Gild. 15, 435, seq.
“ Non contra clypeis tectos, gladiis que micantes	'
Ibitis, in solis longe fiducia telis:
Exarmatus erit, quum missile torserit, hostis.
Dextra movet jaculum, prcetentat pallia lava,
Catera nudus eques.”
Impeditos. “ Embarrassed in their movements.’’ Comparo lote 6, page 53.
Audacissime, Plutarch’s language is at variance with this, since he makes the Gauls to have fought badly. (Vit. Cos. c. 20), aloxp&g dyuvtaa/dvovf.
Oppido. Referring to Bibrax.—Se fefellisse. “ Had disappointed them.”
Quorum in fines, “Into whosesoever territories ”—Suis. Referring to the respective territories of each.
Et domesticis copiis, &c. “And might avail themselves of /{() the supplies of provisions which they each had at home.” Domesticis copiis is here put for domestica copia.
Hac quoque ratio. “ The following consideration also.”— Divitiacum atque Aeduos, &c. They had done in conformity with the request of Caesar. Compare chapter 5.
His. Referring to the Bellovaci. They were desirous of returning home, and defending their territories against the threatened attack of the Aedui.
Nullo certe ordine neque imperio. “In no fixed order and under no regular command,” i. e., in no order and under no disci pline.
Cum sibi, 6cc. “ Each striving to obtain the foremost place on the route.”—Consimilis. “ Very like.” Consimilis is stronger in meaning than similis, and not merely a more sonorous term {vox sonantior),as Forcellini maintains.
Insidias veritus. Caesar feared an ambuscade, because very little acquainted with the country Compare Dio Cassius, 39, 2, Kdioap <5# jjtrOiTO fifv rd yiyv6ftevo*, oi>K trdXprioe Se epag eiOdf, iyvoiq rib Xuptuv, f’s«hu>£a(.
Cum ab extremo agmine, dec. “ While those in the rear, with whom our men first came up, made a stand,” &c.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
4()	8. Perturbatis ordinibus. “ Having broken their ranks.”—Pnt*
sidium. “ Their safety.”
Quantum fuit diei spatium. “ As the length of the day allowed.” More literally, “ as much as there was space of day.”
Destiterunt. Supply interjicere. The later editions have destiterunt sequi, an inferior reading.
Ex itinere. “On his way,” i. e., on the line of march — Paucis defendentibus. “ Although only a few defended it,” i. t., although the garrison was weak.
Vineas agere. “ To move forward the vinea.” The vinca were mantlets or sheds, under which the besiegers worked the battering ram, or else approached the walls to undermine them. Consult Archeological Index.
| J 1. Aggere jacto. “A mound being thrown up.” The agger was a mound or rampart composed of earth, wood, hurdles, and stones, which gradually increased in height towards the town, until it either equalled or overtopped the walls. Towers were erected on it, from which the soldiers threw darts or stones on the besieged by means of engines. Consult Archaeological Index.
Turribusque constitutis. “ And towers being erected on it.” The Romans had two kinds of military towers, those that were erected on the mound, and which are here meant, and those that were built at some distance from the besieged place, and were moved up to it on wheels. Consult Archaeological Index.
 Operum. “ Of the works.” Referring to the agger, turres, &c.—Celeritate. “ The despatch.”—Impetrant.	“ They obtain this,” i. e., that their lives should be spared.
Galba. Consult note 9, page 36.—Duxit. Wo have here given the reading of Oudendorp’s smaller edition. The Bipout editor gives ducit, on the authority of several MSS., which is also followed by Daehne and others.
Bratuspantium. Scaliger and others think that this town was the same with Caesaromagus, now Beauvais. But D’Anville is more correct in making it correspond to Bratuspante, an old place that once stood near Breteuil in Picardie. (D'Anville, Geogr. Anc. vol. i., p. 84.)
Majores natu. “The aged men,” or, those advanced in years.’ Literally, “ those greater (i. e., farther advanced) by birth.”
Passis manibus.	“ With outstretched hands.” Passis is
from pando. Compare the Greek paraphrase: ivartraptvaii rait yspafr.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Ad eum. Referring to Caesar.—Facii verba. * Speaks.” 4 j Literally, “makes words,” i. e., a discourse. Verba habere is
* to hold a conversation with one but verba dare, “ to impose upon a person.”
In fide atque amicitia, &c. “ Had always been steady in their attachment and friendship to the state of the Aedui.”—Qui dicerent. “ Who had assured them.”—Omnes indignitates, <kc.
“ All manner of indignities and insults.”
Qui hvjus, &c. The order is, (Eos), qui fuissent principes hujus consilii, profugisse in Britanniam, quod intelligerent, dtc.— Principes. “ The authors.” The prime movers.
Non solum Bellovacos. “ That not only the Bellovaci them- selves.”—Pro his. “ In behalf of these.”— Ut utatur. “ To ex ercise,” i. e., to extend.
Quorum auxiliis, &c. “By whose aid and resources they (i. e., the Aedui) were accustomed, in case any war broke out, to support them,” i. e., to support whatever wars happened to occur. Quorum refers to the Belgas.
Honoris Divitiaci, &c.	“ Out of respect for Divitiacus and
the Aedui.” Literally, “ for the sake of the honour of Divitiacus and the Aedui.”
His traditis. “These hostages having been delivered.” <jO Supply ob si dibus.
Nihil pati vim, &c. Athenaeus informs us, on the authority of Posidonius, that the wealthier Gauls were accustomed to drink the wines of Italy and Massilia, and these, too, unmixed. (Ath. Dcipnos. 4, 36.—Vol. ii., p. 94, ed. Sckweigh.)
Ad luxuriam pertinentium. These words are wanting in many MSS., but they are rendered by the Greek paraphrast, and are also given by Celsus.
Increpitare et incusare. “ That they inveighed against and complained of.”—Patriamque virtutem projecissent. “And had abandoned the bravery of their fathers.” More literally, “had thrown away.”
Confirmare. “ That they resolutely declared.”
Sabim flumen. Achaintre and Lemaire charge Csesar with an error in geography here, and maintain, that, instead of Sabim, we ought to read either Samaram, or else Scaldim, more probably the latter. Their argument appears to be a plausible one.
Adventum. “ The coming up.”NOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
®« Mulieres, quique, &c. The order is, “ conjecisse mulieres, homines^ ue qui per atatem viderentur inutiles ad pugnam” &c.
Eorum dierum, &c. “The mode of marching, on the part of ©ur army, during those days, having been carefully observed by them.” More literally, “ the custom of those days, in respect of the march of our army.” As regards the construction of the genitive here, compare note 10, page 17. — Perspecta. Davies has edited pospecta, which is quite inappropriate.
Neque esse quicquam negotii. “ And that there would be no difficulty.” More literally, “ and that it was no labour.”
Hanc sub sarcinis adoriri. “In attacking this under its baggage,” i. e., “in falling "pon the soldiers of this legion while each of them was still bearing his load of baggage.” By impedi menta are meant the heavier articles of baggage, such as tents, &c., whereas sarcina denotes the load which each soldier carried. The impedimenta were conveyed along by beasts of burden and wagons, but the sarcina formed part of the burden of each soldier. The load which each of them carried is almost incredible ; provisions for fifteen days, sometimes more, usually com, as being lighter, sometimes dressed food; utensils, such as a saw, basket, mattock,
. an axe, a reaping hook and leathern thong, a chain, a pot, &c., stakes, usually three or four, sometimes twelve, &c., the whole amounting to sixty pounds, not including the weight of his arms, for a Roman soldier considered these last, not as a burden, but as a part of himself. Under this load they commonly marched twenty miles a day, sometimes more. Compare Cic. Tusc. Quasi. 2, 37.
1. Qua. Supply legione.—Reliqua. Supply legiones.
Adjuvabat etiam, &c.	“	It	added	weight	also	to	the	advice
of those who brought this intelligence, that the Nervii from early times,” &c.
3 Ei rei student. “ Do they pay much attention to this,” i. e., to the raining of cavalry.—Sed quiequid possunt, &c. “But whatever they are able to do they effect by means of their foot* forces.” With valent supply efficere.
4. Incisis atque irijlexis. “ Being cut in and bent,” i. e., being half cut, so that they still continued to grow, the trees were then bent longitudinally, and their branches assumed a lateral direction.
6. Crebris in latitudinem, &c.	“	Numerous	branches,	and	briers,
and thorns intervening iff a lateral direction.” The branches are those of the young trees mentioned in the previous note. The in* tervals between these were filled up with briers and tnorns, which
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK..
int 3rmingled, as they grew, with the boughs of the trees, and foe 43 whole formed an impervious kind of hedge, which answered all the purposes of a regular fortification. The common text has enatis after ramts, which Oudendorp and others reject very properly as a mere gloss. It does not appear in the best MSS.
Non modo. Put for non modo non. This ellipsis is of frequent occurrence. Compare B. G. 3, 4, and consult Sanct. Min. vol. ii., p. 293, ed. Bauer.
Non omittendum, &c.	“	That	they	ought	not	to neglect the
advice which had been given them.”
Quem locum. This species of repetition has already been al luded to. Compare note 7, page 4.
Ab summo aqualiter declivis. “ Sloping with a regular descent from the summit.”—Collis nascebatur, &c. “Another hill arose, over against and facing this,” i. e., directly opposite. The two epithets adversus and contrarius, being nearly analogous, are used to impart additional force to the expression.
Passus circiter ducentos, &c.	“	Having	the	lower part clear
and open for the space of about two hundred paces.” In order to convey the true meaning of apertus here, we have rendered it by a double epithet. The literal meaning of the clause is, “ open as to the lowest parts,” infima being put for quod ad infima loca.
Silvestris. “So woody.” Supply t*a. The Greek para- phrast has icvSpioSes fidXiora.
. 12. In aperto loco. Referring to the lower part of the hill, where there were no trees.—Secundum flumen. “ Along the river.” - Stationes equitum. “ Troops of horse on guard.”
Ratio ordoque, &c.	“	The	plan and order of the march was
different from what the Belgae had mentioned to the Nervii.” More literally, “ had itself otherwise than the Belgse had mentioned,” &c.
Expeditas. “ Free from all encumbrance,” i. e., who had laid aside the load of baggage which each soldier was accustomed to curry on the march. Compare note 11, page 42.
Duce legiones. “ The two legions.”—Totum agmen clou debant. “ Closed the whole line of march,” i. e., brought up the rear.
Identidem. “ From time to time,” i. e., every now and then.
Quem ad finem. “As far as.”—Porrecta ac loca aperta. uThe clear and open ground.” Porrecta literally refers to what Btretches out in front, and is free from any obstacle or impediment.
18 Opere dimenso. “The work having been measured out,
Cc
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
P**V
431. e.f a space of ground having been marked out for an encampment.
Opus here refers to all the labour requisite for fortifying.
1 Prima impedimenta. “The first part of our baggage-tram.”
Referring to the wagons which conveyed the heavier baggage, and, on this particular occasion, a part also of the individual burdens of the soldiery.
Quod tempus, dec. “ Which had been agreed upon between them as the time for joining battle.”—Ita ut intra silvas, &c. “ They on a sudden darted forth, with all their forces, in the same order in which they had posted their line of battle and ranks within the woods, and as they themselves had encouraged each other to do. '* Confirmaverant refers to previous concert and mutual exhortation.
Proturbatis. “Repulsed.” The early reading was perturbatis, which, of course, is far inferior. Faemus restored the true lection from an old MS. Compare Frontinus (2, 2, 4): “ Equitatum pedites proturbantem.” The primitive meaning of proturbo ia to push off, or from, one.
In manibus nostris. “ Close at hand.” The phrase properly denotes, that the enemy were so near that they could almost be touched by the hand. Compare. Sallust, B. I. 57: “ Cupere pros Hum in manibus facere ,*” and Lipsius, Var. Led. 2, 13: “ In manibus esse, nisi fallor, dixit praesentes esset et ita propinquos ut paene manibus tangi possent.”
Adverso colle. “Up the hill,” i. e., up the opposite hill, or the one facing that down which they had rushed.
VexiUvm proponendum. “The standard to be displayed.” This was of a crimson colour, and was displayed on the praetorium or general’s tent. Plutarch, in his life of Fabius, c. 15, calls it \iT&v kSkkivos, and in that of Marcellus, c. 26, <f>oiviKovs \it&v, and it appears t«* have been, in fact, nothing more than a crimson cloak or chlamys attached to the top of a spear, xi™v being used here by Plutarch in the sense of ^Xa/id?. Compare Schneider, Lex. s. v., and Lipsius, Mil. Rom. lib. 4, dial. 12, sub init.
Signum. “ The signal of battle.” The signal for the conflict to commence; and hence the Greek paraphrast renders it by ro *•- Itfntdv.—Tuba. Consult Archaeological Index
Aggeris petendi causa. “ In order to seek materials for the mound.”—Milites cohortandi. Referring to tho harangue, or short address to the troops before the action commenced.
Signum dzndum. “ The word to bo given,” This is the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
I ogw.
aattle-word, called otherwise in Latin tessera, and in Greek avvbtpa, ^ as the Greek paraphrast here correctly renders it. The object of giving the word was, that the soldiers might be able to distinguish those of their own side from the enemy, in case night should come on before the battle was over, or they should be separated irom each other. The word was generally some auspicious term or name, such as Victoria, or Libertas, or Jupiter Servator, &c.
Successus et incursus. “The near approach and onset.” Caesar is fond of using terms nearly synonymous, one of which serves in some degree to explain the other. Thus we have “ patienda et ferferenda,” B. G. 7, 30. and “extremum et ultimum” B. C.
5, &c.
Erant subsidio. “ Proved of advantage.”—Scientia et usus.
“ The knowledge and experience.”—Exercitati. “ Having been practised.”
Singulisque legionibus. “And from their respective legions.”—Nisi munitis castris. “ Unless the camp was previously fortified,” i. e., until after the fortifications of the camp were finished.
Nihil jam, &c.	“	No	longer	now	looked	for	any	command
from Caesar,” i. e., no longer waited for any orders from him. Count Turpin de Crissi very justly censures Caesar, 1. for leading his archers, slingers, and cavalry across the Sabis, before his camp was at all fortified ; 2. for not having reconnoitred the wood, before he attacked the enemy’s horse at the bottom of the hill; 3. for rashly joining battle with the enemy on disadvantageous ground, when he ought to have kept his light troops on this side the stream, until the wood was reconnoitred and a suitable ford was found, and should have had one legion at the foot of the hill to support them if attacked. The experience of the Roman soldiers alone saved the army from utter defeat.
Quam in partem, &c. “In the direction which chance first presented.” The common text has sors, which will not at all in swer here.
Quam quo telum, &c.	“	Than	whither	a	dart	could	T>e made
to reach.” Adjicere telum is to throw in such a manner that the weapon leaches its destined object.
Pugnantibus occurrit. “ He found them already fighting.” Literally, “ he met with them,” or “ came in contact with them.”
Exiguitas. “ The scantiness,” or “ shortness.”
Ad insignia accommodanda. “For fitting the military in- fignia to their helmets.’ The insignia here alluded to were the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
4 skins of wild animals, such as bears, wolves, dec. Compare Polylb i us, 6, 22. Lipsius is w rong, in thinking that Caesar here refers in particular to crests. {Anal, ad Mil. Rom. dial. 2.)
Sed etiam ad galeas induendas. “ But even for putting on their very helmets themselves.” Oudendorp prefers inducendas^ the reading of some MSS. and editions, as the more recondite term, and, therefore, the most likely to be the true reading, and to have been driven from the text by a glossarial interpretation. But the Greek paraphrast settles the point for us by his use of ivbvtoQai. The Roman soldiers, when on the march, generally had their helmets hanging down on their breads or backs, and replaced them on their heads when about to attack or be attacked.
Tegumenta. These covers were made of leather, and were put upon the shields in order to preserve the polish and ornaments of the latter. They are called by Cicero (N. D. 1, 14), “ Clypeo- rum involucra.” The Roman soldiers were very fond of painting and otherwise adorning their shields, and Suetonius informs us, that Caesar’s soldiers in particular used to ornament their armour with silver and gold. (Vit. Cos. c. 67. Compare Poly anus, 8, 28.)
 Ad hac constitit. “ By these he took his station.”—In qua- rendo silos. We have here adopted the reading of one of Scaliger’s MSS. It is far superior to the common lection in quarendis suis.
Pugnandi tempus dimitteret. “ He might throw away the time of fighting.”
Dejectus. “ The declivity,” or slope.—Necessitas tempons. “The urgency of the occasion.”—Ratio atque ordo. “The principles and systematic arrangement.”
Prospectus impediretur. “ The view in front was obstructed.” —Neque certa subsidia collocari. “ Neither could any succours be placed anywhere with certainty.”
Administrari. “ Be given.”—In tanta rerum iniquitate. “ In so adverse a posture of affairs.”
Legionis nona et decima. “ Of the ninth and tenth legions.” Some MSS. and editions have legionum nona et decima, of which Oudendorp does not disapprove, though he retains the ordinary lection. The Greek paraphrast has Sticdrov re teal Iwdrov rdyparos.
Ut in sinistra, &c.	“ When they had taken their stationi
on the left part of the line.” Acie is here the old form of the genitive, for aciei. Oudendorp restored this reading from MSS. Com-NOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
pure the remark of Aulus Gellus : “ Cams Ctesar, in libro de Anar logia secundo, hujus die et hujus specie dicendum putat.”
Exanimatos. “Panting,” i. e., almost breathless. Caesar frequently employs this term to denote those who with difficulty Iraw their breath through fatigue and exhaustion.
Nam his, &c.	“	For	that	part	of the enemy bad fallen to
the lot of those,” i. e., it was their lot to come in contact with that part of the foe. By his are meant the soldiers of the ninth and tenth legions.
Impeditam. “While impeded in their movements by the stream.”
.4. Divcrsce duae legiones. “Two other legions,” i. e., two legions different from those just mentioned. Compare the Greek paraphrast, 5<5o SXXa rdyfiara.
n. Ex loco superiore. “ Having descended from the highei ground.”
At turn. “At this stage of the fight, however.” Compare the explanation of Oudendorp, “ eo tempore, et ea re.” Some of the MSS. have attonitis for at tum totis, without any sense whatever, while many of the later editions give merely ac totis. Our present reading at tum totis is due to the ingenuity of Oudendorp.
A fronte, &c. The eleventh and eighth legions had occupied a position in front of the camp, but had been drawn off by their pursuit of the Veromandui, and were now fighting on the banks of the stream. In like manner, the ninth and tenth legions, which had served as a guard for the left of the camp, were gone in pursuit ot the Atrebates.
Cum in dextro cornu, &c.	“	The twelfth legion having taken
tip a position on the right wing, and the seventh also at no great distance from it.” This remark is added by Caesar, m order to show where the two remaining legions were, which, together with (he four already mentioned, were employed in fortifying the camp when the attack was made.
Aperto latere. “ On their unprotected flank.” The right flank of the twelfth, and the left of the seventh, were exposed, the latter in consequence of the advance of the other legions which had occupied the centre and left of the line.
Summum castrorum locum. “ '1 he summit on which stood the camp.” Compare the Greek paraphrast, *■pdj r« &Kpa rdvuw Jpforo. So also in chap. 24, we have, “ ab decumana porta ac iummojufo collis ”
C c 2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Levis que armatura pedites. The same with the vetstes Consult Archaeological Index.
Dixeram. Vid. chapter 19.—Adversis hostibus occurrebant. “ Met the enemy in front,” i. e., face to face. The enemy were now in the Roman camp, and the cavalry and light-armed troops met them as they entered.
Aliam in partem, &c. The more usual form of expression is tl Aliam partem fuga petebant,” and Ciacconius thinks we should read so here. The expression fugam petere, however, as Davies remarks, is one occasionally met with in the best writers. Com pare Virg. AZn. 12, 263. Liv. 9, 23. Ov. A. A. 1, 552, &c.
Calones. “ The soldiers’ servants.” The calones, in general, merely followed the army as attendants upon the soldiers. Occasionally they were not allowed at all. At other times, again, they formed no bad kind of troops, from their familiarity with the Roman exercise. Compare, as regards this latter point, the remarks of Josephus, B. I. 3, 4.
Decumana porta. “The Decuman gate.” This was tho name of the gate in the rear of the Roman camp, and was, on this occasion, of course, the farthest from the enemy. It derived its name from the circumstance of the tenth cohorts in the legion having their tents in its immediate vicinity. Compare the words of Lipsius {Mil. Rom., 5. 5.), “ Decumana a cohortibus decimis, ibi tendentibus, sic dicta.”
Versari. “To be busily employed.” Versari may otherwise
be considered here as equivalent merely to the simple esse.—Pros- cipites fugce, &c.	“	Consigned	themselves	headlong to flight.”
Aliique aliam in partem, &c.	“	And,	being greatly alarmed,
they were carried some in one direction, others in another,” i. e., they betook themselves to flight in different directions.
Quorum inter Gallos, &c.	“	Of	whose valour there is a pe
culiarly high opinion among the Gauls.”
Diversos dissipatosque. “ Each in a different quarter, and scattered here and there.” Diversos is here equivalent to alios alio loco.
Ab decimat legionis cohortatione. Lipsius {Elect. 2, 7) boldly, but without any authority, conjectures cum decimae legionis cohorte.
Urgeri. “ To be hard pressed.” Signis tn unum locum collutis. “ The standards having been brought together into one
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Page.
place,’' i. e , in consequence of their having been brought, &c.— 46 Sibi ipsos. M >re elegant than sibi ipsis, the common reading.
Omnibus cevUurionibus. There were six centurions in each cohort.—Signo amisso. To lose the standards was esteemed very disgraceful among the Romans, and the standard-bearer was punished with death, if the loss was occasioned by any misconduct of his. Sometimes a commander, in order to urge on his soldiers, threw the standard into the midst of the foe. Compare Lips. Mil.
Rom. 4, 5.
Primopilo. “The chief centurion of the legion.” The first centurion of the first maniple of the Triarii received this name.
He was also called primus pilus, was intrusted with the eagle or main standard of the legion, ranked among the equites as regarded pay, and had a place in the council of war with the consul and tribunes.
Ut. “So that.”—Tardiores. “Less active in their exertions.”—Et nonnullos, &c. “And that some in the rear, being deserted by their leaders,” i. e., having no leaders or inferior officers to urge them on to the fight.
A fronte. “In front.”—Subeuntes. “Coming up.”
Et rem esse in angusto. “ And that affairs were desperate.” Supply loco, and compare the Greek paraphrast: «ai rd irpaypa ht ry lay&T<p tXvai. Appian (de Reb. Gall. 4) makes Caesar to have been for a time completely encompassed on the hill by the forces of the Nervii: tit Mtpov rivet ytT& tQv bnaenciaruiv vt<ptvy6ra vipttoyov
(of NfpStoi).
Ab novissimis, &c.	“	Having	been snatched by him from a
soldier in the rear.” Uni militi is by a Hellenism for ah uno milite. According to Florus (3, 10), the soldier was at the time in the act of fleeing from thp battle. Celsus, however, makes him to have been contending with but little spirit.
Signa inferre, &c. “ He ordered the-troops to advance and open their files.” Literally, “ to extend, or widen, their maniples.”
They had been previously crowded together; he now ordered them to station themselves apart, or at intervals from each other, and in this way to keep the maniples distinct.
Cujus. Equivalent to hujus, as it begins the clause. The common text has hujus, but it is less elegant.—Redintegrato animo. u Their courage having revived.” Literally, “ being renewed.”
Pro se. “ To the best of his ability.” Equivalent to pro sua tirili parte.—In extremis suia rebus. “In the last extremitv
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE BECOND BOOK.
of their affairs,” i. e., when their affairs were in the last extremity. Compare the Greek paraphrast: Ip toXs xaXtntrdToit wpdyfta*t.
47 L Legiones. The seventh and twelfth.—Et conversa signa, <$rc.	“ And should advance with a double front against the foe.”
Convertere signa properly means, “ to face about,” and the literal signification of the clause, therefore, is, “ should advance the stand- ards turned about against the foe.” It must be borne in mind, however, that, when the legions united, the seventh formed in the rear of the twelfth. When, therefore, the word was given, convertere signa, the seventh faced about against the foe in their rear, and the two legions then stood back to back, the twelfth having continued all the time facing in front. In this way conversa signa inferre,, which, elsewhere, would mean “ to face about and advance,” gets here the signification, “ to advance with a double froDt.” The passage is generally misunderstood by commentators, but the meaning is well expressed by Count Turpin de Criss6 : “ Cisar ordonne aux officiers de faire joindre peu a pea les deux legions, et, riunies, de s'adosser Vune a Vautre, faisant front de tons les cdtes.”
Ne aversi, dec. “ Lest, being turned away, they should be surrounded by the enemy,” i. e., of being attacked behind and surrounded. Their rear was defended by the other legion, who now stood with their backs towards them, and fronting the foe.
 Cursu incitato.	“Advancing at full speed.” Literally, “ their pace being quickened.”
Decimam. Plutarch erroneously makes it the twelfth.
Versaretur. “ Were.” Equivalent to esset.—Nikil ad cele~
ntatem, &c.	“ Made all the haste they could.” Literally, “ caused
nothing to remain unaccomplished by them as regarded speed.” The Greek paraphrast gives this elegant expression rather tamely: •6i<v avltoav rfjs Tayirrjrot.
Procubuissent. “ Had reclined upon the ground.”—Scutis innixi. “ Having supported themselves on their shields.”
Etiam inermes, dec. “Even though unarmed encountered them armed.”—Delerent. “ They might wipe away.”
Omnibus in locis, &c.	“	Put	themselves	forward	in every
quarter for the fight before the legionary soldiers,” i. e., strove U surpass them in valour. The common text has omnibus in locis pugnabant, quo se, &c., which is not a bad reading.
Prastiterunt. “ Displayed.”—Jacentibus insisterent. “ Stood on them as they lay.”—His. Referring to those just mentioned who had been standing on, and fighting from, the bodies of their countrymen.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Uti ex tumulo. “As if from an eminence.” Compare the 47 Greek paraphrase : &s Ik nvbg y^Xtyou, “ As from a kind of hill.”
Ut non nequidquam, &c. “ So that it ought to be concluded, that men of so great valour had not, without good reason, dared to cross a very broad river, ascend very high banks, enter upon a very disadvantageous position; for their resolute spirit had rendered these things easy from having been most difficult,” i. e., their conduct on this occasion was not the mere result of a momentary impulse, but in perfect accordance with the opinion always entertained of their valour. Nequidquam is here equivalent to frustra, or sins causa. The Greek paraphrast renders it by pdrrjv.
Redegerat. In the sense of reddiderat. The term, as Davies observes, is one of uncommon occurrence, though used by Caesar B. G. 4, 3, “ Vectigales sibi fecerunt ac multo humiliores infirmi oresque redegerunt.”
Prope ad internecionem redacto. “ Being almost extermina ted.” Literally, “reduced to extermination.” So internecivum bel lum, “ a war of extermination ;” internecivum odiumt “ a deadly hatred,” i. e., which is only to be satisfied by the destruction of one or other of the parties.
JEstuaria ac paludes. “The low grounds and fens.” By <tstuaria are here meant low grounds, in which the waters settle after an inundation or heavy rains. The term eestuarium, however, is generally applied to an estuary, or arm of the sea, where the tide ebbs and flows.—Dixeramus. Consult chapter 16.
Nihil impeditum. “That nothing was a hinderance,” i. e., 43 that nothing was too difficult.—Victis nihil tutum. “ That nothing was safe for the vanquished.”
Suisque fimbiis, &c. “And directed them to continue to occupy their own territories and towns,” i. e., allowed them to retain their lands and towns.
Itinere. In one of the MSS. itere occurs, which is the old form of declining : viz., iter, iteris, iteri, &c.
Oppidum. Thought by D’Anville to have been situate on the hill where stands the modem Falais.
Quod cum ex omnibus, &c. “ For while it had on every side, round about, very steep rocks, and commanded a view of the country below.” Literally, “ very high rocks and lookings down.”—
Quern locum. Referring to the approach to the town.
Ipsi. The Aduatici.—Ex Cimbris. Appian erroneously makes thrs remark concerning the Nervii (de Reb. Gall. 4). Dio
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Cassias, on the other hand, gives the correct account, in accord&.ice
with Caesar's (39, 4). *Arovantol 	 sal	rb	ytvo( rb re fp&njfxa
rb t&p Klft6puv fyovref.
Nominum. After this word almost all the editions have una. But it is difficult to conceive what need there is of it in the sentence, and it is more than probable that it arose from the careless repetition, on the part of some copyist, of the termination of hominum. It is found, however, in almost all the MSS. But still, as it does not appear in others, and is omitted by the Greek paraphrast, we have thrown it out from our text.
Post eorum obitum. “ After the destruction of their countrymen.” Referring to the disastrous overthrow of the Cimbri and Teutones by Marius.—Exagitati. “ Having been harassed.”
Cum alias, dec. “When at one time they made war on them, at another warded it off when made upon themselves,” i. e., when at one time they acted on the offensive, at another on the defensive.
Excursiones. “Sallies.”—Parvulis pr aliis. “In slight skirmishes.”
Pedum duodecim.	“	Of	twelve	feet	in	height.” Supply in
altitudinem.
Turrim. This was a moveable tower, to be brought forward on wheels. Consult Archaeological Index.
Quo. “ For what purpose.” This is the reading of Lipsius, Sc aliger, and others. The MSS. and early editions have quod. Oizdendorp thinks that perhaps quoi had been used here and elsewhere, for which cui was in later times the prevalent form.
Prce magnitudine, &c. “Compared with the large size of thoir own frames.”—In muros. “ Near the walls.” Equivalent to juxta muros.
Moveri et appropinquare. “Was set in motion, and was approaching.”—Ad hunc modum. “ After this manner,” or “ to this effect.”
Non. To be joined in construction with sine.—Qui present, “ Since they were able.”
Et ex propinquitate pugnare. These words are omitted in many MSS. As they are retained, however, by others of good note, and are translated also by the Greek paraphrast, we have deemed it best to retain them.
6. iJJmim petere ac deprecaH. “ That they begged and earnestly entreated one thing.”—Pro sua clementia, &c.	‘	In	accordance
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
Page
■with bis wonted clemency and compassion.”—Audirent. The sub- 4.9 iunctive is here used, because it refers to the sentiments of the speakers, not to those of the historian, and hence audirent is equivalent, in fact, to “ had heard, as they said.”
Sibi prcestarc. “ That it was better for them.”—Si in eum casum deducerentur. “ If thej should be reduced to that state.”
More literally, “ to that unhappy condition.”
Per cruciatum interjici. “ To be tortured to death.”
Magis consuetudine, &c. “In accordance rather with his usual custom, than from any merit on their part,” i. than because they were at all deserving of lenity.—Aries. Consult Archaeological Index. The Romans generally spared those who surrendered before the battering-ram struck their walls.
In Nerviis. “ In the case of the Nervii.” The common text has in Nervios, which is an inferior reading. Consult Burmann, ad Quintii. Decl. 15, 6.
Facere. The present with the force of the future. Consult Sanct,. Min. I, 14, and Perizonius, ad loc.
Muri aggerisque. The wall was that of the town, while the agger or mound was that of the Romans. The arms were cast between the wall and mound.
Sub vesperum. “ Towards evening.”
Prcesidia deducturos. “Would drawoff the guards.”—Aut £jQ
denique, &c.	“ Or, at least, would keep watch less carefully than
usual.” Denique is here equivalent to saltern. Compare Seneca,
de Ira, 3, 18, “ Quid instabat 1 quod periculum aut privatum aut publicum una nox minabatur 1 quantulum fuit, lucem exspectare 7 denique ne senatores Populi Romani soleatus occideret.”
Pellibus induxerant. “ They had covered with hides.”—Ter tia vigilia. The third watch began at twelve and ended at three.
Ignibus. “ By signal-fires.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, wpKaTais—Proximis. Nearest that part of the town from which the sally was made.
4 Ita acriter, &c.	“ As fiercely as it ought to have been fought
by brave men,” &c., i. e., with that spirit which might have been expected from brave men so situated.
Occisis ad hominum, &c.	“	About four thousand having been
slain.” The preposition is here to be rendered as an adverb, though, when the ellipsis is supplied, it will be found to govern a case as usual: thus, occisis millibus hominum ad numerum quotum jjaij^um Comparo the remarks of Perizonius, ad Sanct. Min. 1, 16.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SECOND BOOK.
50	6. Refractis portis. " The gates being broken open.” Strong®*
than the simple fractis.—Quum jam defenderet nemo. The early editions add captum oppidum, probably from a gloss.
Sectionem ejus oppidi, &c. “ Caesar sold all the booty of that town,” i. e., sold all the inhabitants as slaves, and their effects along with them The inhabitants constituted the principal booty of the place. The primitive meaning of sectio is a cutting, or dividing into small portions. It is then applied to the purchasing of the booty of a captured place, or of the goods of a condemned or proscribed persoh; because the purchaser, in such cases, bought by the quantity, and sold out in small portions to others, or, as we would say, by retail. Sometimes, however, as in the present instance, the term sectio is taken to denote the booty or goods themselves. Our own expression, “ retail,” from the French retailler, which is itself compounded of re and tailler, “ to cut,” illustrates very forcibly the peculiar meaning of sectio.
Ab his qui emerant, &c. “ The return made to him by those who had purchased, was fifty-three thousand souls.” Literally, “ there was returned unto him, by those who had purchased, the number of fifty-three thousand heads.” The highest bidders made returns to Caesar of the number which they had respectively bought, and the sum total was 53,000. Compare the Greek paraphrase: of 6' fcvijadfuvoi hpidfxbv (hwt bpaoav dvSpGtv ntvraKiofivpitov col irpnr^iX/wv.
Oceanum. The Atlantic. The tribes referred to in the text were situated in the westernmost portion of Gaul, partly along the coast from the Liger (Loire) to the Sequana (Seine), and partly a short distance in the interior.
Ulyricum. Caesar’s authority extended over Illyricum, which had been given him with the province of Gaul.
Dies quindecim, &c.	“	A	thanksgiving	for fifteen days was
decreed.” A supplicatio, or thanksgiving, was decreed by the senate, for any signal victory, and was solemnly made in all the temples. On such occasions, the senators and people at large, crowned with garlands, attended the sacrifices. A lectisternium also took place, couches being spread for the gods, as if about to feast, and their images being taken from their pedestals, and placed upon these couches, round the altars, which were loaded with the richest dishes. Compare the language of Plutarch in relation to the present occasion (Ft/. Ctes. c. 21). fH ovyKXrjTos nevTiKalStKa hiwploaro $veiv rots $fo7j, «cal <rxo\d£etv eoprdfyvras-
Digitized by GoogleBOOK III
(juo. “By which.” Supply itinere.—Magnis ^ue cum par- 52 «niis. “ And with heavy imposts.” It was this circumstance that caused the articles, which were brought into Gaul by the traders,
rbr the use of Caesar’s army, to command so high a price, and Caesar, therefore, wished to lower this price, by breaking up the system ef taxation which the inhabitants of the Alps had imposed upon all merchandise conveyed through their country. Portorium originally signified the duty levied on goods in a harbour (in portu), whence the name. The signification was afterward extended, and, as in the present instance, denoted the tax paid for liberty to carry goods through a particular country.
Hie. “This village.” Supply vicus.—Flumine. Orosius,
8, gives torrente. The Greek paraphrast omits the term.
Eum locum. “ This latter part,” i. e., that part of the village in which the cohorts were to have their winter quarters.
Hibernarum. “ Of their wintering,” i. e., of their being in winter quarters. The term hibema usually signifies the winter quarters themselves ; it is here, however, taken for the time of remaining in them.
Id aliquot de causis, &c.	“	It	had	happened,	on	several	ac
counts, that the Gauls had suddenly formed the design of renewing the war and crushing the legion.”
Neque eam plenissimam. “ Which was not, in fact, a complete 53 one.” More literally, “nor it completely full.” Equivalent to at eam quidem nan plenissimam. Compare Cic. Phil. 2, 18, “ Certa Hagitii merces, nec ea parvaand Liv. 5, 33, “ Procter sonum lin- gu<z, nec eum incorruptum retinent. By legio plenissima is meant one with the full complement of men as fixed by the usage or law
of the day. This complement varied at different times. Consult Archaeological Index, and compare note 23, page 5.
Singillatim. “ Individually.” Compare the explanation of Morus : Singulorum militum, qui singuli discesserant.
3 Decurrerent. “ Should run down.” Compare the Greek,
D D
Digitized by Google31H>
p>lt
53 Uvt&v KaToSpaftovfihm.—Ne primum quidem, <fcc. The common text has suum after impetum, on the authority of some MSS., and sustineri instead of sustinere. The reading which we have adopt* ed is far more elegant, and harmonizes with the Greek paraphrase: OMf rilv xpiinjv cipuiv bppilv rovg 'Pw/iolouc bifaaBai. Wiffi SU8 tiller e W6 must supply legionem illam.
Accedebat. “ Another reason was.” Moro literally, “to this was added.”—Suos ab se, &c. “That their children were tom from them,” &c.
Sibi persuasum habebant. “ They were firmly persuaded.* More literally, “ they had it persuaded unto themselves.”
Cum neque opus, &c.	“	As	neither the labour of constructing
winter quarters, and the requisite fortifications, were completed.’* More literally, “ completely gone through with.” Davies, Moms, and many other commentators, regard opus hibernorum munitiones- que as a hendiadys for opus munitionum hibernarum, “ the labour of fortifying winter quarters.” This, however, is incorrect. Opus hibernorum refers to the erecting of suitable buildings to accommodate the soldiers, and also of hospitals, armories, workshops, &c., all of which were contained in the winter quarters of the Romans.
Neque de frumento, &c. “Nor had a sufficient supply ot grain and other provisions been procured.” More literally, “ nor had sufficient provision been made with respect to grain and other sustenance.”
Neque subsidio veniri. The verb veniri is here taken impersonally, posset being understood. “ Neither could assistance come to them.” Literally, “ neither could it be come unto them with aid.”
Ad salutem contenderent. “They should hasten to some place of safety.”—Majori tamen parti placuit. “ It pleased, however, the greater part,*' i e., it was the opinion of the majority ot the council.
Hoc consilio. Referring to the design, as recommended, ot leaving their baggage behind, and sallying forth from their winter quarters.
Rei eventum experiri. “To await the issue.” Literally, “ to try the issue of the .affair ”
Collocandis atque administrandis. “ For arranging and ex
ecuting.”— Decurrere. The historical infinitive for decurrebant. So conjicere for conjiciebant, repugnare for repugnabant, &c	Com
pare note 8, page 10.
GoogleVOTES OK THE THIRD BOOK
>1$. GttSaque. “ And javelins.” The gaesum was a Gaelic jave- 53 iin, entirely of iron. Compare Hesyckius, ymtwtt IjMuw ihotfip,
Und Pollux, 7, 83. The latter makes it to have been used also by the Africans. Serous is equally explicit, but terms it a Gallic weapon. “ Pilum, proprie est hasta Romana, ut Gessa Gallo- rutu.** Compare S. Augustin, hoc. da Josue, lib. 6, “ Septuaginta interpretes, qui posuerunt Geson (Jos. 8, 18), miror, si et in Graea lingua hastam vel lanceam Gallicanam intelligi voluerunt, ea quippe dicuntur Gesa” Consult Adehmg, Gloss. Med. et Inf. Lot. vol.
p. 785.
Integris mribus. “ While their strength was fresh.”—Frus fra. “ In vain,” i. e., without effect.—Ex loco superiore. “ From the higher position which they occupied,” i. e., from the rampart on which they stood.
Eo occurrere. “ Thither they ran.” Occurro here denotes,
“ to run up to and confront.” 0©sar means, that, wherever dangei presented itBelf, thither the Roman soldiers ran and met it.
Sed hoc eupentri. “ But in this they were overcome,” L e., the enemy had in this the advantage over them.
Quod diuturnitate pugnat, Ac. “ Because the enemy, wearied by the long continuance of their exertions, from time to time kept retiring from the battle, while others kept succeeding to them with fresh strength.” Pugna, when opposed, as in the present instance, to predium, denotes the closeness of the fight, and the physical exertions of the combatants. Praelium, on the contrary, expresses rather the state of the battle, in whatever manner conducted. Pugna, too, may be either long or short, with or without preparation ; whereas praelium refers to a contest of some length, for which, generally, preparation is made. Crombie, Gymn. vol. i., p. 128.
Paucitatem. “Their smallness of number.” Literally, 54 “ their fewness.”—Non modo. Put for non modo non. Compare note 6, page 43.—Sui recipiendi. “ Of recovering himself,” i. e.
of having his wound attended to, and of otherwise reinvigorating himself.
Dejicerent. “ Were failing.”—Atque. “While.”—Langui- Horibusque nostris, Ac. “ And, our men growing every moment more and more faint, had begun to hew down the rampart,” Ac.
Ad extremum casum. “ To the last extremity.”
Primi pili centurio. “ The chief centurion of the legion,” i e., the first centurion of the first maniple of the triarii. Primopilus has already occurred in the second hook (c. 25), as a military title
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
r«|«.
54 applied to the oldest centurion (compare note 11, page 46). Hem, however, though the same office is meant, the expression changes, and centurio primi pili is employed. In this latter case, the term pilus, from which pili comes in the genitive, stands for centuria. Thus, Forcellini remarks, “ Differunt autem primipilus et primus pilus; nam primus pilus est prima centuria; primipilus vero ejus centuria ductor.” Compare B. G. 6, 36, “ Superiore armo primum pilum duxerat;” and Sueton. Calig. 44, “ Plerisque centurionum, maturis jam, primos pilos ademit.” The term pilus gets this meaning, from the circumstance of the soldiers composing it being armed with the javelin or pilum.
Diximus. Compare B. G. 2,26.—Tribunus militum. Compare note 6, page 23, and consult Archaeological Index.
Unam esse spem salutis. “ That the only hope of safety- was,” i. e., that their only chance of saving themselves consisted in making a sally.—Extremum auxilium. “ A last resource.”
Convocatis centurionibus. The centurions were called to
gether, in order that the necessary instructions might be passed through them to the soldiers.—Celeriter milites, &c.	“	He quickly
gives orders to the soldiers through them.” Literally, “ informs the soldiers.”
Exciperent. “ To take up.” Compare the Greek, ^vXdrruv. As their own missiles had begun to fail them, they were directed to supply themselves, with a sufficient number for the intended sally, from the javelins cast by the enemy.
Omnibus portis. A Roman encampment had always four gates, porta pratoria, in front; decumana, in the rear, opposite tho former; principalis dextra, on the right; principalis sinistra, on the left. Consult Archaeological Index.
Neque cognoscendi, &c.	“	They allow the enemy no op
portunity either of ascertaining what was doing, or of rallying themselves.”
In spent, &c.	“	Had	entertained	the	hope of getting pos
session of the camp.” Literally, “ had come into the hope.”
Plus tertia parte. Celsus gives 10,000 as the number of the slain, Orosius 30,000.
Fusis armisque exutis. * Being routed and stripped of their arms.”
Alio consilio. “ With one view,” i. e., for one purpose.— Aliis occurrisse rebus. “ That he had encountered things very different from this,” i. e., had been unexpectedly involved in mattersNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
rety different from the object which liad called him thither. He ^ liad come to make the route over the Alps safer and less expensive for the traders, but had met with things quite different in their nature, namely, an insurrection on the part of the Gauls, and hard fighting. He prudently resolved, therefore, to try fortune no farther.
Omnibus de causis, <fec. “ Caesar had every reason to sup- gg pose that Gaul was reduced to a state of peace.” More literally, “imagined from all reasons.” Compare, as regards the force of pacatam, the Greek paraphrase: rbv TaXarlav tlprjvttofai.
Atque ita, &c.	“	And	when he had, therefore, set out for Il
lyricum, in the beginning of winter.” With atque supply cum. Some editions omit the preposition before Illyricum. This latter country, as has already been remarked, formed part of Caesar’s government.
Mare Oceanum. “The ocean,” i. e., the Atlantic. Oceanum, added here to mare, shows the sense in which the latter term is to be taken, as referring, namely, to the Atlantic, and not to the Mediterranean. Compare Catullus, 115, 6, “ Usque ad Hyperboreos, et mare ad Oceanum;” Pomp. Mela, 2, 6, “ Paulatim se iv nostrum et Oceanum mare extendit ,*” and L. Ampelius, lib. mem. c. 1, “ Atque, ex qua mare Oceanum.”
Prcefectos tribunosque militum. By profecti militum are here meant the officers of the allies, of equal rank with the tribuni militum, or officers of the Roman troops. Each Roman l^ion contained six tribuni militum, and each legion of the allies six pro ect\ militum. Consult Archaeological Index.
Dimisit. ' They were not sent for the purpose of employing force, but to procure the corn by asking it from the Gauls. Hence ♦he term legati, or “ ambassadors,” is applied to some of them i& chapters 9 and 16.
Scientia atque usu. “ In the knowledge and experience.”—
In magno impetu maris atque aperto. “ Amid the strong and outspread ocean surge.” Caesar means, that the heavy swells of the Atlantic compelled the small Gallic vessels to keep close to the shore, and to run into the harbours of the Veneti whenever a storm threatened. This circumstance, of course, rendered them, in a manner, tributary to that nation. The term aperto is applied to the Atlantic in contradistinction to the Mediterranean, where there is land on ever} side. Forcellini explains impetus maris, in this passage, b}
“ Spatium et latitudo maris, ubi libere fertur impetu suo atque agi
D n 2
Digitized byNOTE» ON THR THIRD BOOK..
55 tatur” So in Lucretius, 6, 201, impetus coeli is explained by C& f&nius (Collect. p. 359) as meaning celerrimus coeli ambitus.
Ipsi. Referring to the Veneti.—Vectigales. “ Tributary to them,” i. e., the Veneti levied a regular tax or impost upon them.
Ut sunt, <fcc. “ Since the resolves of the Gauls are always, nasty and sudden.” Ut is here employed in an explanatory sense. Consult Tursellinus, de Part. Lot. p. 448, ed. Bailey.
Omnis. The accusative plural for omnes. Some, with leas propriety, make it the genitive singular, agreeing with fortuna*
Mallent. There is no necessity for substituting malint. Csesar, on other occasions, also uses the imperfect subjunctive after the present tense : thus, B. C. 2, 39, “ Accelerat, ut posset;” B. C. 3, 109, “ Ut in potestate haberet, efficit;" B, Afr. 37, “ Imperat ut essent prosto,” &c.
Suos. “His countrymen/* Referring to those persons whom they had detained.
Quod ipse aberat longius. “ Since he himself was at too great a distance,” i. e., could not come at once to the scene of action and superintend the preparations in person.
Naves longas. “Vessels of war/’ The naves longa were so called, from their being much longer than vessels of burden (naves (meraria). They were impelled chiefly by oars, the ships of burden by sails. Consult Archeological Index.
RerUges. Freedmen and slaves were employed as marines and rowers.—Institui. “ To be raised.”
Quantum in se, &c.	“	How	great	a crime, they had com
mitted against themselves,” i. e., how much they had injured themselves by their violation of the rights of the Roman ambassadors. (Compare note 5, page 55.) This conduct would recoil upon themselves.
Quod nomen. “A title, which,” i. e., a class of persons who. We may very reasonably doubt, whether the persons here alluded to came under the denomination of ambassadors. Csssar, however, was determined to regard them in this light, and, therefore, made their detention a plea for hostilities.
Pro magnitudine. “ In proportion to the greatness.”—Hoc majore tpe. “ With the greater confidence on this account.”
Pedestria esse itinera, &c. “ They knew that the approaches by land were interrupted by arms of the sea, and that access by sea was difficult through our ignorance of the country and the fewness of harbours.” Pcdestt ia itinera, literally, “ the foot-roads.” So
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THB THIJU> *00*.
narngstionem impedtfam, literally, “ that navigation was einbar- f rassed.”
Neque nostros, dec. “ And they were confident, that our armies could not remain for any length of time among them,1’ dec.— Ac jam, ut omnia, dec. “And, besides, even though all things should turn out contrary to their expectations.” Ut is here elegantly used for quamvis.
Ac longe aliam, dec. “ And that the navigation was far other in a confined sea, than in a very wide and open ocean,” i. e., was very different in a confined sea from what it was in a very wide, dec. The confined sea is the Mediterranean, to the navigation of which the Romans were accustomed.
In Venetiam. The accusative implies, that they were brougtr. to the country of the Veneti from other quarters. The ablative would have denoted, that the vessels were already at different parts of the coast of that country, and were merely brought together to some general place of assemblage.
Erant ha, &c. “ Were such as we have already mentioned.”
Injuria retentorum, dic. “ The insolent wrong done in detaining Roman knights.” Injuria is here what grammarians term the plural of excellence, and hence, in translating, is entitled to an epithet, in order to express its force more fully. The peculiar force of the genitive will also be noted by the student. Csesar does not mean the wrong suffered by the Roman knights in their private capacity, but the insult offered to the state by detaining its ambassadors. The Gxeek paraphrase gives the meaning very clearly; t* d$
PUftaiovs C0ptf rod rovg bntias fPupalovs KaTaayelv.
Defectio datis obsidibus. “ A revolt after hostages had been given.” The student will mark the difference between defectio and rebellio. The former denotes a mere “ revolt,” or refusal of obedience to established authority. Rebellio, on the other hand, means “ a renewal of hostilities.”
Hoc parte neglecta. “ If this part were overlooked,” L e., the movements in this jpart of Gaul. Strabo (4, 4, p. 195, Cap.) assigns a reason, for the commencement of hostilities against the Veneti, far different from any here mentioned by Caesar. He says that this nation were prepared to interfere with that commander's sailing to Britain, since they had this island as an emporium or mart: trotfUH ydp Ijoav ku\vuv rdv tl( r)v Bperrans^v irXovv, \pu>f*y<n r$ lyifoptip.
16. Novis rrbus studere. “Are fond of change.” The, refold
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
5g encc is in particular to changes of government or authority.—Piatura libertati studere. “ Are naturally desirous of freedom.,,
57	1. Auxilio. The MSS., with only a single exception, give aux
ilio. This exception is in the case of one of the earliest of the number, which reads in auxilio, * among the auxiliaries.” If several MSS. confirmed this lection, observes Oudendorp, I should not condemn it.
Cum cohortibus legionariis duodecim. Each legion was divided into ten cohorts. Cssar sent, therefore, one complete legion and two cohorts besides.
Galliam. Celtic Gaul is meant, or Gaul properly so called.— Conjungantur. “ Become united,” i. e., form a union against him.
Qui eam manum, <fcc. “ To keep that force from effecting a
junction with the rest.” Literally, “ to take care that that body of men should be kept separated or apart.” Compare the Greek, ri)» Uthmv btvafiiv Sutpyeiv.	*
D. Brutum. Not to be confounded with M. Brutus, one of the conspirators against Cssar. Consult Historical Index.
Situs. “ The situations.”—In extremis lingulis, &c.	“	On
the extreme points of tongues of land and promontories.” The lingula are lower than the 'promontorii. Compare the remark of Festus : “ Lingua est Promontorii quoque genus non excellentis, sed mob- liter in planum devexi.”
Cum ex alto, &c.	“	When	the	tide	had	come	in	from	the
deep,” i. e., when it was full tide.—Quod bis accidit, &c. We have adopted the emendation of Bertius, as proposed by him in Sallengre’s Thesaurus Ant. Rom. vol. ii., p. 948, namely, vigintt quatuor, or XXIV., in place of the common reading, duodecim, or XII. The ordinary lection is a blunder either of Caesar’s or some copyist’s, most probably the latter, since, where the motion of the water is free, as on the shores of the Atlantic Ocean, the period which elapses between two successive tides is never less than twelve hours and eighteen minutes, nor more than twelve hours and forty-two minutes. Perhaps, after all, the reading of the Oxford MS. is the true one, which omits the word bis, but retains XII.
Quod rursus, &c.	“	Because	when	the	tide	again	ebbed,	the
ships were thrown upon the shoals.” With minuente supply sese. The student will note the expression in vadis. Caesar uses this form and not in vada, to denote that the vessels not only struck upon the shoals, but remained there The expression in vada, o«
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
the other hand, would refer merely to their striking. Moms, in his 57 Index Lot., explains adflictari by veluti harentem teneri, but, as we have just remarked, this idea is rather derived from in vadis than from the verb itself.
Utraque re. “By either circumstance,” i. e., in either case, whether the tide were high or low.
Magnitudine operis. “ By the greatness of our works.”— Superati. Referring to the townsmen, and equivalent to victi, “overcome,” or overpowered. Moms erroneously makes it the genitive singular, agreeing with operis in the sense of “ completed,” or, to use his own words, “ absoluti, ad Jinem perducti.”
Extruso mari, &c.	“	The sea being forced out by a mound
and large dams.” We have here, in reality, a species of hendiadys.
The terms agger and moles both refer to the same works, the former denoting their intended military use, as a mound on which to erect towers and plant machines ; the latter referring to their being made to serve also as a species of dike or dam against the waters of the ocean. Lipaius makes extruso equivalent here to excluso. In this he is wrong. It is more properly to be explained by submoto ac vehUi repulso. Compare the Greek : l^uiaOtlarjs %<Jjpa<n rfjs $a\da<nj$*
Atque his, &c. “And these being almost made equal in height to the walls of the town.” His refers to the mound and dams, or, keeping up still the idea of a hendiadys, to the mound itself.
Appulso. “ Being brought to the spot.” Appelleie is, literally, to impel or bring to any place, by either oars or sails, or both.
—Cujus rei, &c.	“	Of	which	kind of force they had a large sup
ply. Compare the Greek: abriav {scil. vc&v) eimopovvres.
Magnis astibus, &c. “Where the tides ran high, and where there were few and almost no narhours.”
Facta: armataque erant. “Were built and equipped.” FjQ Arma, besides its warlike reference, is used by the Latin writers
for instruments or implements of every kind, and, when applied to a vessel, denotes the rigging and equipment, either in whole or in part, according to the context.
Carina aliquanto planiores. “ Their bottoms considerably
flatter.”—Excipere.	“To withstand.” More literally, “to re
ceive” the collision of. Compare the Greek paraphrase : I woffpeip.
Ad quamvis, &c.	“	For	the purpose of enduring any force
and shock.” Contumelia, as here applied to inanimate objects, denotes any shock, brunt, or violence.—Transtra pedalibus, <fcc.
Digitized by GoogleNwras 0«r THB THHLD BOOR.
5ft “ Tbe rowers’ benches, of beams a foot in breadth, were fastenod down with iron spikes, of the thickness of one’s thumb.”
Pelles pro velit, dic. “ For sails they had raw hides, and thin dressed skins.” Aluta, from alumen, “ alum,” with which it was dressed, denotes the skin or hide after it has been converted into leather by the process of tanning. Pellit, the raw hide, or a skin of any kind stripped offl
Lini. “ Of canvass.” Literally, “ of linen.”—Eo. “ On tins account.”—Quod est magis verisimile. “ As is more likely.”
Tanta onera navium. “ So heavy vessels.”—Satis commode. u With sufficient ease,” i. e., very readily, or easily.
Cum hit navibus, dic. “ The meeting of our fleet with these vessels was of such a nature, that the former had the advantage in agility only and the working of the oars,” i. e., in engaging with them, our ships had no advantage but in agility, die. Gruter suspects that pulsu has been received into the text from a gloss in the margin of some MS., because one MS. has pulsu remorum incitatione. His conjecture is very probably correct, as Caesar, on such occasions, is accustomed to employ some part of incitare or incitatio; so that the true reading here would appear to have been incitatione '•emorum, or rather remorum incitatione. In either case, whether we have pulsu or incitatione, the literal reference is to the impulse given to the vessel by the oars, which we have rendered freely by the term “ working.”
 Reliqua.	“ All other things.” — Pro.	“ Considering.”—
TUis. Referring to the Gauls.
Rostro. “ With their beak.” Ships of war had their prows armed with a sharp beak, usually covered with brass, with which they endeavoured to run into their antagonists’ vessel.
Facile telum adjiciebatur. “Was a dart easily thrown so as to reach.” Adjiciebatur is equivalent here to jadebatur ad.
Minus commode, d&c. “They were less easily held by the grappling irons,” i. e., the ships of the Veneti were too high to allow the grappling irons of the Roman vessels to be conveniently applied. We have given copy Us (from copula) instead of the common reading scopulis. It is difficult to comprehend what the height of the Gallic vessels had to do with the rocks, but it is very easy to perceive the bearing wliich it has as regards the application of grappling irons. The reading copulis rests on the authority of the Palatine MS., and was first suggested by Hotomannus. It has been approved of by Bentley, Davies, Oudendorp, Moms, and many
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
incommode in place of commode, but the original difficulty is not completely obviated by this emendation. Scaliger’s reading, however, was followed by many editors until the time of Clark, who restored commode.
Et se vento dedissent. These words labour very justly under the suspicion of being a gloss, and, as such, they are enclosed within brackets by Oudendorp, in his smaller edition.
In vadis consisterent tutius. “ Could lie with more safety among the shallows.*'
Casus. “ The chances," or dangers. — Extimescendi*
“ Greatly to be feared.”
Neque bis noceri posse. “ Nor could any serious injury be done them.” Noceri is here used impersonally.—Expectandum.
The common text has expectandam, for which we have given expectandum, with Drakenborch, on MS. authority. Consult Drakenb. ad Liv. 40, 38.
Paratissima, &c. “ In the best order, and the best prepa
red with every species of equipment.” Arma here refers to the sails, ropes, and other things of the kind, not to arms. The Greeks use feAa frequently in the same way :	rd	rJjr	veu>s	aj^ocv/a.
Quam rationem pugnat insisterent. “ What mode of fighting they should adopt.” Ciacconius suggests instituerent for insisterent, but there is no necessity for the change. As Oudendorp remarks, the verb insistere involves the idea of ardour, zeal, and the most intense application to what we have in hand.
Turribus autem excitatis. “ While if towers should be raised. ” 59 Snips, when about to engage, had towers erected on them, whence stones and missive weapons were discharged from engines.
Satis commode. “ With sufficient effect.”—Gravius accide• rent. “ Fell with greater force.”
Falces praeacuta. “ Hooks with sharp edges towards the points.” A description of these is given by Vegetius (4, 46), “ Falx dicitur acutissimum ferrum, curvatum ad similitudinem falcis, quod contis longioribus inditum, collatorios funes, quibus antenna sus- penditur, repente praecidit,” &c.
Muralium falcium. “Mural hooks,” i. e., hooks used for pulling down the walls of besieged towns. Strabo calls them itptipiirava.
Comprehensi adductique erant. “Were grappled and pulled towards us.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
6. Armamentisque. “And rigging.” The term armament* here refers to the ropes, sail-yards, &c.—Omnis usus navium “ All advantage from their ships.”
Reliquum erat certamen, &c.	“	The	contest	afterward de
pended on valour.” Literally, “ the rest of the contest,” &c.
U nullum, &c.	“	So	that no action a little braver tnan ordi
nary could escape observation.”
Dejectis. The sail-yards were thrown down (i. e., fell by reason of the ropes being cut), either upon the deck of the vessel, or into the sea. The common reading, disjectis, is erroneous, and does not suit the case. Compare the Greek paraphrase, xaTaGXijOirmv.
Cum singulas, &c.	“	When two and three of our ships, at
a time, had surrounded a single one of the enemy’s.” Some editors erroneously refer Una ac terna naves to the Gallic vessels, and singulas to the Roman, giving cum the meaning of “ although.” The Greek paraphrast understands the passage correctly : ivo f) rpels t&p *PWftalmv vrjfg ptav r&v noXtpluv vtpitcraaiv.
Transcendere in hostium naves. “To board the enemies* ships.”
Quo ventus ferebat. “Whither the wind bore them.”— Malacia, ac tranquillitas. “ Calm and stillness.” Compare Festus : “ Flustra dicuntur cum in mari fluctus non moventur, quam Graci paXaxlav vocant.
Singulas consectati, &c.	“ Having pursued, took them one
by one.”—Ut. “Insomuch that.”—Hora quarta. Answering to ten o’clock in the morning, according to our mode of reckoning time.
Gravioris atatis. “ Of more advanced years.” The literal reference in gravioris is to the increasing burden of years.—Aliquid consilii aut dignitatis. “ Aught of wisdom or respectability.” —Navium quod ubique fuerat. “ What of ships they had anywhere possessed.”
1. In quos eo gravius, &c.	“ Caesar determined to punish them
with the greater severity.”
Sub corona vendidit. “ He sold as slaves.” Various explanations are given to this phrase, some referring it to the circle or ring (corona) of Roman soldiers, who stood around the captives during the sale ; others to the circumstance of the captives being tanged in a circle, the better to be inspected by purchasers ; and others again explain it by the persons who were sold wearing gar lands on their heads. This last appears to be the true reasonNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
from the language of Celius Sabinus, and Cato, as quoted by Aulus QQ Gellius (7, 4). The former remarks, “ Sicuti antiquitus, mancipia, jure belli capta, coronis indutcu veniebant, et idcirco dicebantur sub corona venire.” So also Cato : “ Ut populus sua opera potius ob rem bene gestam coronatus supplicatum eat, quam re male gesta coronatus veneat.”
Quintus Titurius, &c. Compare chapter 11.
Atque his paucis diebus. “ A few days before also.” Liter- a.jy, “ within these few days.”—Aulerct Eburovices. There were four nations or tribes of the Aulerci. Consult Geographical Index.
Perditorum hominum. “ Of men of desperate fortunes.” Literally, “ of ruined men.”
Idoneo omnibus rebus. “ Convenient for all things.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, xpdf xdvra txiTri&tl<p, and the explanation of Morus : “ Idoneo omnibus rebus, ratione omnium rerum.”
Duum. Old form for duorum.
Nonnihil carperetur. “ Was in some degree carped at,” i. e., censured, found fault with.—Prabuit. “ Gave rise to.”
Eo absente. “ In the absence of that individual.” Alluding o Caesar.—Legato. Ciacconius thinks legato superfluous here, but t is required, in fact, by the opposition of “ qui summam imperii teneret”
Hae confirmata, &c.	“	Having	confirmed the enemy in their
opinion of his cowardice.” Literally, “ this opinion of his cowardice being confirmed.” — Auxilii causa. “Among the auxiliaries.” Literally, “ for the sake of aid.”
Proponit. “ Makes known to them.” Literally, “ lays De-
fore them.”—Quibus angustiis. “By what difficulties.”—Neque longius abesse, quin, &c.	“	And	that	at	no	more	distant	period
than the very next night, Sabinus intends to lead forth his army secretly from the camp,” &c. More literally, “ and that it was not farther off, but that on the next night Sabinus intends,” &c. The comparative form longius alters somewhat the usual force of the phrase. The ordinary phraseology is as follows: “ Haud mvltum abfuit quin interficeretur.” “ He wanted very little of being slain,”
c., was on the point of being slain.—Non longe abest quin faciat.
“ He is very near doing it.”
1. Multa res. “Many circumstances.” Dio Cassius is here g| iirectly at variance with Caesar, for he informs us, that the Gauls *cted on this occasion without any reflection at all, being sated at he time with food and drink : ndw ydp rot SiaxopiTf rfjs rpofSfc *oI '•C itotoV Jtonv.
E .
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
Perfuga confirmatio. “ The positive assertion of the de •erter.”—Inopia cibariorum. Compare note 1.
Spes Venetici belli. “ The ^expectations they had formed from the war of the Veneti,” i. e., of Crcsar’s being defeated by them. They were not aware that this war had already been brought to a close.
Non prius Viridovicem, &c.	“ They do not allow Viridovu
and the other officers to leave the council, before,” &c.
Circiter passus mille. “ For about a mile.”—Magno cursu. “With great speed.”—Quam minimum spatii. “As little time as possible.”
Exanimati. “ Out of breath.” Exanimatus, in other authors, generally has the meaning of “ alarmed,” “ in consternation.* The literal reference, however, is the same in either case, namely that of excessive palpitation, or a difficulty in drawing the breath whether the result of fear or exhaustion.
Integris viribus. “ With their strength still fresh.”—Paucos “But few.”
Sabinus. Supply certior factus est.
Nam ut ad bella suscipienda, &c. Compare with this the language of Livy: “ Gallos primo impetu feroces esse, quos sustineri satis sit; eorum corpora intolerantissima laboris atque cestus fluere, primaque prcelia plus quam virorum, postrema minus quam feminarum esse.”
Minime resistens. “By no means firm.” More literally, “by no means capable of resistance.”
Ex tertia parte Gallice est cestimanda. “ Is to be reckoned as the third part of Gaul.” We have an expression here {ex tertia parte) which is far from being either elegant or usual. If the text he correct, about which, however, there is considerable doubt, ez ttrtia parte must be regarded as equivalent to pro tertia parte. Some MSS. give Gallia instead of Gallice, a reading which is very far from being a bad one.
Paucis ante armis. The event here alluded to happened in the war with Sertorius, whose side the Aquitani favoured. The Sertorian war had been ended twenty-seven years.—Lucius Manilius. One of the MSS. gives Lucius Manlius, and the Greek paraphrase has AotKtos WldWiof. Lemaire reads Lucius Mallius.
62 i Quce sunt civitates. “Which are cities.” Civitas generally has the meaning of “ a state,” but here that of urbs.—His regionibus. Referring to Aquitania, where Crassus was carrying on hi*
Digitized by UooQleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
operations. Tlie common text had Qua sunt civitates, Gallia pro- (jQ rincia finitima, ex his regionibus; but, as this was geographically false, the cities in question lying, not in Aquitania, but in the province itself, Ciacconius, by omitting ex, and changing the punctuation, gave us what is now the received and true reading.
Quo plurimum valebant. “ In which they were very power- dil.”
Tandem. We have adopted here the reading of several MS§. xnd early editions in place of tamen, the common lection, and have, with Giani, placed a period after caperent, where the other editions have a colon. Those who retain tamen give it the foroe of tandem, instances of which usage are occasionally found. It is better, however, to make the actual change at once, of tandem for tar men, when we can do so on MSS. authority. Scaliger conjectures tandem tamen. The Greek paraphrast has rftof, which furnishes an additional argument in favour of tandem.
Cuniculis ad aggerem, &c.	“ Mines having been worked up
to our mound and vines.” The object of these mines was to destroy the Roman works, by either drawing away the earth from the mound, or by first propping up the roof of the mine with wooden supports, and then setting fire to these, iii order that, when the prop# were burnt through, the superincumbent mass, and, along with it, the Roman works, might fall in.
Cujus rei, &c.	“	In	which	all the Aquitani are by far the
most expert.”—Aeraria sectura. “Copper mines.” The commentators make a very great difficulty here about the true reading, and look upon sectura, in the sense of “ a mine,” as an £*ro£ \ey6pevov. The truth is, however, we may very easily obtain this meaning from sectura, if we only bear in mind its derivation from seco, for it will denote a place where they cut and follow the veins or lodes of copper. (Compare Gesner, Thesaur. L. £. s. v;) Those who are in favour of reading strictura find it no easy matter to fix its meaning in the present case. Strictura, according to Nonius (1, 77, and 12, 23), properly signifies a spark that dies off from a piece of metal struck with the hammer while red hot. It is then applied to a mass of metal in the furnace, and also to a mass of unwrought metal, and it is from this last that a signification is still farther sought to be obtained, about the correctness of which we may well entertain doubts, namely, “ a mass of earth and stone from whkh ore is obtained by means of the furnace.” This is tfre meaning which the advocates for strictura wish to give it in the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
(J2 present case. Another reading is structura, which is certainly I superior to strietur a, and may, after all, be the true lection, for it 1» found in some of the MSS.
Nihil his rebus profici posse. “ That no advantage could be derived by them from these things.”
In ea re intentis. “ Were wholly engaged in this matter.”
Cum sexcentis devotis. “ With six hundred devoted followers, whom they call Soldurii.” There is some doubt whether we ought to read here Soldurios or Saldunas. The term Soldurii is supposed to be of Celtic origin, soldure, and the same with the Welsh sawldwr, with which terms also the French soldat is connected, although some would derive it from the pay received, a solidis, vel a soldo. The other reading, Saldunas, finds some support from the language of Athenaeus (6, 54), who, in quoting from Nicolaus Damascenus, calls the persons referred to in our text EiXofofoovf, which Schweighaeuser, however, has changed to EiXoAofyovf, in order to reconcile it with the received text of Caesar. It is worthy of remark, moreover, that in the Basque language Saldi means “ a horse,” and Salduna “a cavalier.” Still, as ZtXo&otpovs is explained in Athenaeus by <6;goA</ia/oo$, which is equivalent to the Latin devotos, the reading Soldurios must not be disturbed. Con* suit Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol ii., p. 14, and 391, in notis, and Adelung, Gloss, vol. vi., p. 277.
Quorum hoc est conditio. “ The condition of whose association is this.”
Aut sibi, &c. “Or make away with themselves.” The primitive meaning of consciscere is to determine, or resolve, after previous deliberation either with one’s self or another. It then gets the additional signification of “ to put in execution, to bring about what has been determined upon.” Hence the phrase consciscere mortem sibi, “ to lay violent hands upon one’s self,” is well explained by Fo^ellini) “ nempe exsequi id quod deliberaveris et decreveris.”
63	1 Cum iis Adcantuannus. These words are here added, for
the sake of perspicuity, after the long parenthesis which intervenes, and hence the words Adcantuannus cum sexcentis devotis, in the - beginning of the chapter, stand, as it were, absolutely.
Tamen uti, &c.	“	Obtained,	notwithstanding, permission
from Crassus to avail himself of the same terms of surrender with the rest.”
Barbari. “These barbarous tribes.” Referring to the Vo
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
gates and Tarusates.—Et natura loci et manu. “ By both the nature of its situation and the hand of man,” i. e., both by nature and
an.
Paucis diebus quibus, &c.	“ In a few days after the Romans
had come thither.” The relative is here employed, agreeing with diebus, in place of the more usual form postquam or ex quo (Zumpt L. G. p. 307). With ventum est supply a Romants, or a nostris.
Citerioris Hispania. Hither Spain, the same with Hispania Tarraconensis, may be said, in general language, to have formed the northern part of the country, comprehending an extent equal to three fourths of modem Spain. The remaining part was called Ulterior, or Farther. The limits of each, however, are given with more accuracy in the Geographical Index.
Magna cum auctoritate. “With great confidence,” i. e., with a high opinion of their own resources. Compare the explanation of Morus: “ Cum opinione majoris dignitatis auctarumqut virium.”
Quinto Sertorio. The famous commander.—Omnes armos “ During all the years of his warfare in Spain.”—Summamque scientiam, &c. They were thought to possess great military skill from their having served under so able a commander, and for so great a length of time.
Consuetudine Populi Romani. “ Following the custom of the
Roman people.” They had learned this under Sertorius.—Loca capere, &c.	“	Begin	by	selecting proper ground, fortifying a camp,*\
&c. By loca is meant ground fit for an encampment. With regard to the use of instituo in the sense of incipio, compare Quintii. 1, 5, 63, and Burmann, ad loc.
Facile. “With safety.” Equivalent here . iQituto. Compare the Greek paraphrast:	ye.	%
Hostem et vagari, &c. “That the enemy both roamed at large over the country, and possessed themselves of the passes, and ret, at the same time, left a sufficient guard for their camp.” Obsi- d&re is here a verb of the third conjugation, from obsido, not obsideo.
Duplici acie instituta. The usual arrangement, on the part of the Romans, was three lines. On the present occasion, however, only two were formed, as the Roman army was inferior in numbers to that of the enemy: and, besides, the mountainous nature of the country enabled Crassus to dispense with the usual order of battle.
Auxiliis The auxiliary forces were usually stationed on
E ■ 2
Digitized by GoogleN0TBJ3 ON THE THIRD BOOR*
the wings ; here, however, they occupy the centre, because Cnesua did not place much reliance upon them.
Sub sarcinis. Compare note 11, page 42.—Inferiores ammo. “ Depressed in spirit.” Compare the Greek paraphrase : ifhpsrdrotg.
Cum sua cunctatione, &c.	“	When	the	enemy	had,	by their
own delay, and the opinion which was now entertained of their cowardice, made our soldiers the more eager for battle.” The commonly received reeding is timidiores hostes (i. e., hostes timidiores jam facti), the adjective timidiores agreeing with hostes in the nominative. This reading, although it has the sanction of some great names, appears to us a very inferior one, and not much in unison with the context. We have not hesitated, therefore, to substitute timoris, the emendation of Robert Stephens and Vossius, of which Oudendorp thinks highly, although he retains timidiores. By opinione timoris is meant the opinion, which the Roman soldiers began to entertain of the enemy’s cowardice, from seeing them, although superior in numbers, keeping in their camp; and this lection receives support also from the Qreek paraphrase : $ <p6Cov napslx** 6fa, which is equivalent to r& <p66iv tjv nmp£xoy	Compare	also
the language of Julius Celsus: “ Romani hostium tarditatem non consilio imputantes, sed pavori,” &c.
Quibus ad pugnam, <5cc. Compare note 12, page 63,—Speciem atque opinionem, &c.	“	Gave	rise	to	the	appearance	and
opinion of their being actually engaged in the fight,” L e., produced file appearance, and gave rise to the opinion op the part of the enemy, of their being actually combatants.
Constanter ac non timide “ Steadily and boldly.” The Greek paraphrast either follows a different reading, or else very strangely mistakes the meaning of constanter, for he renders it bv
tfovifMS-
Non frustra acciderent. “ Fell not without effect.”—As Decumana porta. “ In the quarter of the Decuman gate.” As the Gallic camp, on this occasion, was fortified after the Roman manner, it had the same number of gates, and in the same quarters. Hence the name “ Decuman gate” applied to the entrance in the rear.
Intrita aJb labore. “ Not fatigued by any previous labour.” The common text has integra, but this savours of a gloss. Intrita is equivalent with non trita, or non defatigata. A large number of MSS. have interrita, but this appears to have arisen from a cor rpption of intrita.
Digitized by L.ooQleNOTH* OK THfc THIRD BOOK*
Intenderunt. “Strove.” This is the reading of nearly aU (he MSS. and early editions. The common text has contenderunt,
‘ hastened.” The Greek paraphrase has hsxelfseav, in accordance with our lection.
Multa nocte. “Late at night,” L e., after much of the night had passed.
Supererant. “ Alone remained.”	65
Qui longe alia ratione, dec. “ Who resolved to carry on the war in a very different manner from the rest of the Gauls.” The expression bellum agere, which rests on MSS. authority, is rarer and more elegant than bellum gerere, the reading of the common text.
Thus Pomponius Mela, 1, 16, “ Ut aliena etiam bella mercede age- rent;” and Quintilian, 10, 1, “ Qui» enim caneret bella meliu» quam * qui sic egerit.”
Continentes. “Extensive.” The Greek paraphrast takes continente» here in the sense of “ contiguous to their own country.” * The term is certainly susceptible of this meaning, but the other signification is more natural in the present instance.
Longius, &c.	“	Having	pursued	them	too	far,	amid the more
intricate parts.”—Deperdiderunt. Some MSS. give disperdiderunt.
One of the Oxford MSS. has desideraverunt, which is rather an interpretation of deperdiderunt.
Inermibus imprudentibusque. “ While unarmed and off their guard,” i. e., while occupied in felling the trees of the forest, and unprovided, consequently, for any regular resistance.
Materiam. “ Timber.” This term is elsewhere used in the same sense, or in that of “ wood,” by Caesar. Compare also Cur tius, 6, 6, 28 : “ Multam materiam ceciderat miles.”
7 Conversam ad hostem. “ Directly facing the enemy.”—Ex-
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE THIRD BOOK.
65 struebat. “ Piled it up.” The timber was to supply the place of a regular rampart.
Magno spatio confecto. “A large apace being cleared.” Literally, “ being completed,” or “ finished,” i. e., a large number of trees haying been felled.
Extrema impedimenta. “ The rear of their baggage.”—Densiores silvae. “ Still thicker parts of the woods.”
Sub pellibus. “ In tents.” Literally, “ under the skins.” The tents of the Roman soldiers were covered with skins. In winter quarters huts were erected. Canvass does not appear to have been employed until a comparatively late period. Lipsius, Mil. Rom. lib. 5, dial. 5.
Qua proxime bellum fecerant.	“	Which	had	made	war	upon
nim last.” Bellum facere is here put for bellum inferre; thus, B.
O.	7,2, “ Principesque se ex omnibus bellum facturos pollicentur.**
Digitized by G	eBOOK IV.
Cneio Pompeio, &c. B. C. 56, A. U. C. 699.—Germani. 67 * A people of Germany.”—Et etiam Tenchtheri. These were aleo
a German tribe.
Quo Rhenus influit. “ Where the Rhine flows into it,” i. e , near the mouth of that river.
 Centum pagos. “A hundred cantons.”—Ex quibus, &c- ‘ From each of which they led forth annually, beyond their confines, a thousand armed men,” &c. E finibus is equivalent here to extra patriam.—Bellandi causa. We have retained causa, though it is omitted by some MSS., and though the omission is approved of by Oudendorp and others. For instances of this ellipsis, compare chap. 17, near its close, and also B. G. 5, 8, and consult Ruddi- man, Instit. 2, 2, vol. ii., p. 245, and Perizon. ad Sanct. Min. 4, 4.
Sic neque agricultura, &c.	“	In this way neither is agricul
ture, nor are the art and practice of war, intermitted,” i. e., discontinued, or forgotten.
Privati ac separati agri, <&c. Tacitus makes a similar remark : M. G. 3, 9, “ Area per annos mutant, et supereat' ager ”
—Incolendi causa. “ For the sake of a residence.”
Maximam partem. “ For the most part.” Supply secundum. A Hellenism of frequent recurrence in Caesar.—Multumque sunt in venationibus. “Are much addicted to hunting.” Literally, “ are much in hunts,” i. e., are much engaged in them.
NuUo officio, dec. “ Accustomed to the control of no rules oi duty or of education.”—Alit. “ Nourishes,” i. e., increases.—
Et immani corporum, dec. “ And makes them men of prodigious size of body.” Scaliger rejects homines contrary to the MSS.
The Greek paraphrase sanctions its being retained : sal vtXwptovf, bf tlwnv, fteyiOovs ipSpas waptyu.
hods frigidissimis. “ In the coldest parts of their country,”
e., in the parts farthest to the north, and the most exposed to the rigours of their climate.—Exiguitatem. “ Scantiness.”—Apertu
Exoosed,” i. e , in a state of nudity.
Digitized by GoogleMOTIS ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
rs*B.
Qua bello ceperint, 6cc. The order is, ut habeant (illos) qm but vendant (ea) qua ceperint bello.
Quinetiam jumentis, 6cc. “ The Germans, moreover, d> not use imported cattle, in which the Gauls take the greatest delight, and which they procure at an extravagant price.” All the MSS. give importatis his, but his is wanting m some of the earlier editions. Oudendorp, therefore, very neatly conjectures importatitiis, which he introduces into the text of his smaller edition, and in which he is followed by Oberlin. We have adopted the conjecturo without any hesitation. Bentley, ho'wever, is in favour of importatis omitting Aw, and this reading is given by many editors.
68 i Scd qua sunt, dec. The grammatical construction is as fol lows : Sed (quod attinet ad) parta atque deformia (jumenta) qua nata sunt apud eos, ejiciunt quotidiana exercitatione ut hac sint summi laboris. In rendering, however, into oar idiom, it will be neater to translate without reference to the actual ellipsis of quod attinet ad: “ But the small and Hi-shaped cattle which are bred among them, these they render, by daily exercise, capable of enduring the greatest toil.”
Parva atque deformia. The common text has prava atque deformia, which savours strongly of a pleonasm. We have, therefore, adopted parva in place of prava, which is the reading of Ou- dendorp’8 smaller edition, and is given also by eight MSS. The Greek paraphrast, moreover, has fUKpds, and Tacitus (M. G. 5), in speaking of the German cattle, says expressly that they were for the most part of small size : “ plerumque improcera.”
Turpius aut inertius. “More shameful or spiritless.” — Ephippiis. “ Housings.” The term ephippium does not denote a saddle, but a cloth laicton the back of a horse (ty Urov). Saddles were not used by the ancients. It is extremely probable, that they were not invented until the middle of the fourth century of our era. The earliest proof of their use is an order of the Emperor Theodosius, A. D. 385, by which those who wished to ride post-horses were forbidden to use saddles that weighed more than sixty pounds. Codex Theodos. 8, 5, 47.—Beckmann's History of Inventions, vol.
p. 251, seqq.
Itaque ad quemvis, 6cc. “And hence they dare, however few they may be, to advance against any number of cavalry that use housings.”
ft Importari non sinunt. At a later period, in the time of Tacitus, the Germans along the Rhine purchased wines from the Roman traders. Tacit. M. G. 23
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON ThE FOURTH BOOK.
Page
t>. Publice. “ In a public point of view,” i. e., to the state at gg largo.—Vacare agros. “ For the lands to lie desolate,” i. e., uninhabited and waste. Literally, “ to be empty.”—Hac re significari. “ That by this it is shown.”
Civitatium. The common form is civitatum, but many examples of genitives plural in turn, where the rules of the grammarians would lead us to expect the termination in um, may be found in Vossius, Anal. 2, 14, and Ruddiman, Instil. 1, 2, 59, in notisy vol. i., p. 93.
Ad alteram partem, dtc. “ On the other side the Ubii are next to them.” More literally, “ the Ubii come up to the other aide,” i. e., are in their immediate vicinity.
Quorum fuit chitas, &c.	“	Whose	state was at one time ex
tensive and flourishing, considering the condition of the Germans,”
e., who once possessed an extensive and flourishing state for Germans. More literally, “ as the state of the Germans is.”
 Et paulo, quam sunt, &c. The true reading here is extremely doubtful, owing to the discrepancy of the MSS. and editions. The generally received lection is et paulo, quam sunt ejusdem generis, et ceteris humaniores. Now to this there are two serious objections; one, that by it two different constructions ate joined with one and the same comparative, of which but a very few instances can be found elsewhere; and the other, that by (homines) ejusdem generis, and ceteris, the very same persons are meant, namely, the Germans; for it is absurd to say, that by the former of these expressions the Ubii are meant, since Caesar would make them, in that event, a little more civilized than themselves! We have adopted, therefore, the emendation of Bentley. By ceteri ejusdem generis are meant the rest of the German nation.
Amplitudinem gravitatemque civitatis. “The extent and populousness of their state,” i. e., the state of the Ubii. Gravitatem is here equivalent to frequentiam.
Humiliores iufirmioresque. The former epithet refers to the diminution of their amplitudo, which embraces the ideas of both extent of territory and abundance of resources ; the latter alludes to the lessening of their numbers.
In eadem causa. “In a similar case,” i. e., similarly situated, subject to the same treatment from the Suevi as that which the Ubii had endured. Compare the Greek paraphrase • rabrd ro6r*t
»\ ObomtTtii tI KOI ol Tiy^dtpoi braOov.
Digitized by GoogleNOTH* ON TUS FOURTH BOOR.
Quas regiones. Those namely in the vicinity of the Rhine. —Aditu. 44 At the approach.” Compare the Greek,
Demigraverant. We have adopted the pluperfect, as recommended by Morus, instead of the perfect, as given in the common text. The former of these tenses harmonzies better with the context.
69 l- Rursus reverterunt. A pleonasm, of which examples often occur m the b&t writers : thus, Curtius, SJ, 11, 14, 44 Rursus in prolium redeuntand Petronius, c. 10, 44 Rursus in memoriam revocatus.”
Quieta in suis sedibus. These words are not in the common text. They were first restored by Oudendorp, from MSS.
Reliquam partem hiemis, &c.	“	They	lived, for the remain
der of the winter, on their provisions,” i. e., on the provisions which they, the Menapii, had collected for their own consumption. Aluerunt se, literally, “ they maintained,” or “ supported them selves.” As regards the use of copiis, here, in the sense of 44 provisions,” compare Tacitus, Ann. 15, 16: “ Contraque prodiderit Corbulo, Parthos inopes copiarum, et, pabulo attrito, relicturos op* pugnationem.”
Infirmitatem. “ The fickleness.”—Mobiles. 44 Changeable.” Nihil his committendum. 44 That no trust should be reposed in them,” i. e., that none of his plans ought to be made known to them, and that their fidelity and attachment ought not to be taken for granted.
Est autem hoc Gallica consuetudinis. “For this is one of the Gallic customs.” More literally, “ this appertains,” or 44 belongs to Gallic custom,” i. e., forms a part of it; is one of their customs.
Vulgus circumsistat. “The mob gather around.” — Pronuntiare. 44 To declare.”
His rumoribus, &c.	“	Influenced by these reports and hear
says, they often concert measures respecting the most important affairs.” Literally, “ enter into consultations.”—E vestigio. 44 Instantly.”
Cum incertis rumoribus serviant. “ Since they are mere elaves to uncertain rumours,” i. e., have blind faith in them.—Et plerique ad voluntatem, dtc. 44 And since most persons give them false answers adapted to their wishes.” More literally, 44 answer things feigned according to their wish,” i. e., feigned designedly to please them.
Ne graviori bello occurreret “ That he might not meet with
4
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Pag».
a more formidable war (than he had originally expected),” i. e., be 09 involved in a more formidable one. The phraseology here employed by Caesar is.equivalent to “ ne in gravius bellum incideret” Caesar feared lest the Gauls, with their known fickleness, should make common cause against him along with the Germans.
Facta. 44 Mad been already done,” i. e., had already taken place. Compare the Greek: cvfi6c6rjKdra i/iStj.
Ad Germanos. Referring to the Usipetes and Tenchthen.
—Uti ab Rheno discederent. “ To leave the vicinity of the Rhine,”
e., to advance into Gaul. Compare the language of Celsus, c. 65 .
44 Seque inferrent in intima Galliarum.”
Dissimulanda sibi. “ Should be concealed by him.” Com pare the Greek paraphrase: Kpvirrta hytoaro tlvcu.
Resistere. Supply Us.—Neque deprecari. 44 And not to sup- 7Q plicate for peace.” Compare the Greek : pf/re naOuctrefatv.—Venis-
se. Supply se, and compare the previous chapter, 44 invitatosque cos,” &c.
Suam gratiam. 44 Their friendship.”—Vel sibi, &c.	44	Let
them either assign lands to them.”
Eos tenere. 44To retain those subject to them.”—Possederint. The subjunctive is here employed, as indicating what they, the speakers, asserted of themselves. So again possint expresses their own opinion, not that of Caesar also.
Concedere. 44 Yielded,” i. e., acknowledged themselves inferior to.—Ne dii quidem, &c. Compare the Homeric dvrldtos, as applied by the poet to his heroes.—In terris. 44 On the earth.”
Exitus. 44 The conclusion.”—Neque verum esse. 44 That it neither was right. Verum here denotes what is right, just, or proper. Compare Horace, Sat. 2, 3 : 44 An cecunque facit Ma- tenasy te quoque verum est ?” and again, Epist. 1, 7: 44 Metiri se quemque suo modulo ac pede verum est.”
Neque ullost &c.	44	Nor	were	there	any	landp vacant in
Gaul.”—Sine injuria. 44 Without injury,” i. e., without positive injustice to the Gauls, or injury of some kind to the Roman sway. -~Sint. 44 Are,” i. e., are, as he informs them.
Ab iis. 44 From them,” i. e., from the Ubii. The common text has ab Ubiis. We have adopted, however, the conjecture of Brutus, which Oberlin erroneously ascribes to Morus. The Greek paraphrase accords with this : rap’ abr£v.
Hos expectari equites. 44 That the return of this body of cav- vhv wa* only waited for.”
F r
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
r»gr.
*7(J	9. Vosego. This name is variously written : Vosegus, Vogesw»
and Vosagus. We have given the preference to Vosegus, as sane tioned by MSS., by the language of an ancient inscription, and thr usage of writers in the middle ages. Consult Venant. Fortunat 7. 4, and Greg. Turon, 10, 10, as cited by Cellarius, Geog. Ani. vol. ii., p. 141. Cortius, however, prefers Vogesus {ad Lucan. 1. 397), but consult Benther on the other side. (Animadv. Hist. c. 5, p. 75.)
10. Et parte quadam, &c. We have adopted here the Bipont reading with Oberlin, Moras, Lemaire, and Daehne. Oudendorj gives a very different lection, and one far inferior, as follows : in- sulamque efficit Batavorum, in Oceanum influit, neque longius at Oceano millibus passuum octoginta in Rhenum transit.
1 Citatus. “ In rapid course.”—Oceano appropinquat. Some
of the MSS. give oceanum, but Caesar more frequently employs the dative with this verb. Compare B. G. 6, 44, and 7, 82.
In plures diffluit partes. “ Divides into several branches.”
*	3. Qui piscibus atque ovis, &c. Compare Pliny, if N. 16, 1.—
Multis capitibus. “ By many mouths.” Compare the Greek paraphrase : woXXoTg <rr6pamv. Vossius denies that any other Latia writer employs caput in the sense of ostium ; but compare Lucan, 3, 201, and Cortius, ad loc. Consult also Liv. 33, 41, and Creviei ad loc.
Ut erat constitutum. “ As had been mentioned by them.’ Equivalent to ut erat dictum. It appears to be, in truth, a careless manner of expression in the present instance, since, as appears from chapter 9, Caesar had not consented to any such arrangement.
Sibi jurejurando fidem fecissent. “ Should give them security
by an oath.” Fidem facere is here the same as fidem dare.—Ea conditione, &c.	“ They assured him, that they would avail them
selves of those conditions that might be proposed by Caesar,” i. e., of whatever conditions might be proposed.
Eodem illo pertinere. “Tended to the same end,” i. e., had this one object in view.—Qui abessent. “ Who were said to be absent.”
Profectos. The commanders of turmo are here meant, being analogous to the Greek /Arfpxai.—Mittit. Supply quosdam.
Sustinerent. “ Only to stand their ground.” Literally, “to sustain the attack.”
Non amplius quingentos, &c. Supply quam after amplius. -O B. C. 3, 99, “ Amplius millia viginti quatuorLivy, 33, 7.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
u Amplius tria millia militum amissa;” and Nepos, 16, 2, 3, 7] “ Dion amplius centum adolescentuli” The reason why so small a number of German horse dared to attack so large a body of Roman cavalry, was the contempt which the former entertained for the latter from the circumstance of their using ephippia» Compare chapter 2.
Eorum. Referring to the Germans.
Rursus. “ In turn.” Equivalent here to vicissim.—Sub- fossisque equis. “ And haying stabbed our horses in the belly ”— Dejectis. “ Being dismounted.”
Ita perterritos. “In such dismay.”—In conspectu. The 72 common text has in conspectum, but some of the MSS. exhibit in conspectu, which is undoubtedly the true reading. In conspectum venire refers 'merely to the action of the moment, but in conspectu venire, as Clarke well explains it, is to come into the sight of another, or of others, and remain there for some length of time. Compare Veckner, Hellenolex. p. 261, and Ramshorn, L. G. $ 150,
p. 290.
Intercluso. “ Intercepted,” i. e., cut off by the enemy from the rest of our troops.
Animum advertisset. For animadvertisset, which is the reading of the common text.—Incitato equo. “ Spurring on his horse.”
Per dolum atque insidias. “ By deceit and treachery,” i. e., with a deceitful and treacherous design.—Expectare. “To wait,”
e., to delay coming to an action.—Summce dementia esse. “ To be the height of folly.” Dementia, want of judgment on particular occasions ; amentia, madness, total alienation of reason.
Infirmitate. “ The fickleness.”—Quantum jam, &c. “He was sensible how much reputation the enemy had already gained among them by the issue of a single battle.” Eos refers to the Gauls, and hostes to the Germans.
Quibus. Referring back to eos, i. e., to the Gauls.
Ne quern diem, &c. “ Not to let a day pass without bringing the enemy to an engagement.” Quern for aliquem.
Omnibus principibus, &c.	“	All	their	leading	men	and elders
being brought along.” Literally, “ being taken unto them.”
Sui purgandi causa. “ For the sake of clearing themselves.”
—-Quod contra atque, &c.	“	Because,	contrary	to	what	had been
said by them, and to what they themselves had requested, they had actually joined battle the day previous,” i. e., had fallen upon on* men.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Faga	-	;
10. De induciis fallendo impetrarent. 44 They might obtain a farther truce by deceiving him.” It is more than probable, that both this and the previous statement are false, and that Caesar acted with bad faith towards the Germans, not they towards him. It is difficult to conceive, that their leading men would have put themselves so completely into the hands of the Romans, had their object been a treacherous one. On the other hand, Plutarch informs us (Vil. Coes. c. 12, seq.), that Cato actually charged Caesar with a violation of good faith on this occasion, and was for giving him up to the enemy. (Compare Sueton. Vit. Jul. c. 24.) The breach of good faith with which Cato charged him, seems to have consisted jn his attacking the Germans while he had their ambassadors with him ; more especially since Dio Cassius informs us (39, 47, seq.\ that the battle was owing to the uncontrollable ardour of the youngei warriors among the Germans, which their elders disapproved of to such a degree, as to send an embassy to Caesar far the purpose of explaining what had been done. This embassy, therefore, Caesar detained, and, in the mean time, marched against and conquered those for whom they had come to intercede.
Gamsus. Nearly all the MSS. and earlier editions give gravius without any meaning at all, and gavisus, therefore, has been substituted by all the more recent editors. With this latter reading also the Greek paraphrase concurs : rovrotg Si xapovatv b KaTaap fatifts, bcetvovs pev Karia\tv.—Illico. The common text has illosy and the pronoun is said to' be here redundant. (Consult Amtzenius, ad Aurel. Viet. c. 27, 43.) We have preferred, however, illico, the very neat emendation of Daehne, which is in some degree borne out by the language of Celsus: 44 Quos ubi Caesar adspexity nulla penitus de re auditos illico capi jussit”
1. Discessu suorum. 44 By the departure of their own countrymen,” i. e., by the absence of the leading men and elders, who had been detained by Caesar.—Perturbantur. 44 Are thrown into great confusion, and are altogether at a loss.”
Pristini diei. 44 Of the day before.” Pristini is here put for pridianiy examples of which usage also occur in Cic. de Orat. 1,
Quint. Curt. 8, 4. Suet. Aug. 94. Compare also the language of Aulus Gellius (10, 24), 44 Die Pristino, id est priorey quod vulgo pridie dicitur.”
Ad quos consectandos. The barbarity of this transaction ad mits of no excuse. Hottoman endeavours to save the credit ol Caesar, by reading conservandos for consccttmd&s, but this is directlv
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
contradicted by the language of the next chapter, “ svjos interfici,” 73 &c. The Greek paraphrase also is express on this point: teal & pip Kalaap rfjv hnrov ini tovtovs inf fliparo.
Post tergum clamore audito. This proceeded from the outcries of those who were pursued by the Roman cavalry.—Suos. Referring principally to their children and wives.
Ad confluentem, &c. “To the confluence of the Meuse and Rhine.” The battle appears to have been fought near the spot where now stands the modem Aix-la-Chapelle. By the confluence of the Meuse and Rhine is meant the junction of the former river with the Vahalis or Waal, a little above the modem Bommel.
Reliqua fuga desperata. “ The rest of their flight being despaired of,” i. e., all hope of farther flight being taken away.
Ex tanti belli timore. “ After the alarm of so great a war,**
f., a war of so formidable a nature being ended.—Quadringenta rum, &c. Orosius makes the number 440,000; Plutarch 400,'000.
But both these numbers are very probably exaggerated.
■ S. Multis de causis. According to Plutarch, Capsar’s true motive was a wish to be recorded as the first Roman who had ever crossed the Rhine in a hostile manfier. (Vit. Cas. c. 22.) Dio Cassius makes a similar statement (39, 48).
Suis quoque rebus, &c.	“ He wished them to be alarmed for
their own possessions also.” Literally, “ to fear for their own things.”
Accessit etiam. “Another reason likewise was.” More literally, “it was added also.”—Quam supra commemoravi. Consult chapter 12.
Ad quos. Referring to the Sigambri.—Eos. The Usipetes 7 1 and Tenchtheri.
Cur sui quicquam esse, &c.	“ Why should he insist that any
right of commanding, or any authority whatsoever, belonged to him across the Rhine 1” Sui is the personal pronoun, governed by esse.
Occupationibus reipublica. “ By his public engagements.” More literally, “ by the occupation which the republic (i. e., public affairs) afforded.” Some MSS. have populi R. instead of reipublica, with which reading the Greek paraphrase (rfiv 'Ptapafov) appears to agree. Celsus, on the other hand, has “ reipublica, negotiis occupatus V
Nomen atque opinionem. “ The name and reputation.”—Ad ultimas, &c. The preposition ad is here used in the same sense as apud, which latter is the reading of the common text. Compare Sanct. Min. 4, 6 ami Perizonius, ad loc.
F f 2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
5. Neque nut* &c.	“ Nor consistent with his own character a
the dignity of the Roman people.” Dignitatis here varies slightly in meaning, according as it refers to Caesar or the Roman peopled large.
Proponebatur. “Was manifest.” Literally, “was placed before the view.”—Id sibi contendendum. “ That he must strive to effect this.”
Rationem pontis, dec. “ He determined upon the following plan of a bridge.”—Tigna bina sesquipedalia, &c. “ At the distance of two feet from one another, he joined together two piles, each a foot and a half thick, sharpened a little at the bottom, and proportioned to the depth of the stream.” We have preferred rendering tigna by the word “ piles,” as more intelligible than “ beams” in the present instance. The distributive bina refers to the circumstance of their being many pairs of these piles or beams.
Dimensa ad altitudinem fluminis. The meaning is, that they were of greater or less length, according to the various depths of the stream, being longest in the middle of the river, and diminishing in length according to the proximity to the banks. All, however, projected equally above the level of the water.
H<ec cum machinationibus, &c.	“ When he had, by means of
engines, sunk these into the river and held them down there, and had then driven them home by rammers.” The participle and verb, immissa defixerat, are to be rendered as two verbs with the connective, immiserat et defixerat.
Fistucis. The fistucce here meant are not hand-rammers, but machines worked with ropes and pullies, by which weights are raised to a considerable height, and then allowed to fall upon the pile beneath. Compare Vitruvius, 3, 3, and 10, 3, and also the ex> planation of Morus, ad loc.
Non sublicce modo, &c.	“	Not	quite perpendicular, after the
manner of a stake, but bending forward and sloping, so as to incline according to the direction of the stream.” The slope of the piles will be perceived from the plan that is given of the bridge. The piles here spoken of were those on the upper part of the river, and which looked downward, or secundum flumen. In other words, they pointed down the stream.
lis item contraria bina, &c.	“ Opposite these, at the dis
tance of forty feet, lower down the river, he placed other pairs, oined in the same manner, and turned against the force and current of the river.” The common text has contraria duo, for which
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Clarke firs gave contraria bina. Caesar very probably wrote con- 74 traria II., and hence the error arose. The context requires bina.
So the distributive quadragenum refers to the several pairs. The piles here spoken of lay on the lower part of the river, and pointed up the stream. In either case, therefore, whether in the upper or lower part of the river, they were prona ac fastigata.
Ab inferiore parte. Supply fluminis.
Hac utroque, &c.	“	Each	of these pairs of piles, moreover,
were kept from closing by beams let in between them, two feet thick, which was the space from one pile to another, fastened on noth sides, at either extremity, by two braces.”
Quantum eorum tignorum, &c. Literally, “ as far as the mining of these piles was apart.” The reference is to the space of two feet which was left between the two piles of each pair, when they were first sunk into the river.
Quibus disclusis, &c. “These pairs being thus kept apart (by the beams let m), and, at the same time, firmly clasped by the braces in the opposite direction.” This sentence is explanatory of the preceding one, hac utraque, &c., and contains, if the expression be allowed, the key to the whole structure. The beams let in between the two piles would have a tendency, of course, to keep them apart, while the braces above and below would have an opposite tendency, and would serve to keep the piles together. The greater die pressure, therefore, one way, the stronger the resistance the other; and the constantly acting power would be the current of the stream itself.
Tanta erat, &c.	“	So	great	was the firmness of the whole
structure, and such was the nature of the materials employed, that the more powerfully the force of the current drove itself against the different parts, the more closely were they connected together and kept in their places.” Literally, “ by how much a greater force of water had urged itself on.”
Hac directa matene, &c.	“	These cross-beams were overlaid
and connected together, by rafters placed in the length of the bridge, and these again were covered over with poles and hurdles.” Hoc refers to the beams running across from one pair of piles to the opposite pair.—Directa materie. The term materie is very erroneously rendered “planks” by some editors. Planks would not be strong enough for the purpose. Directa is well explained by Clarke, from Lipsius: “ secundum longitudinem ponlisV
4 T,ongu iis. The / mgurix were long poles, placed across the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
70 rafter», very close to one another, and the hurdles were strewed ove» these, in order to produce a more level surface.
Ac nihilo secius, &c. “And, besides all this, piles were likewise driven in obliquely, at the lower part of the stream,” <Stc. These piles, as will be perceived from the plan, served as props, or rathe- buttresses against the impulse of the waters. Had they not been placed where they were, the violence of the current might have carried the bridge over to the opposite side of the river.— Nihilo scctus. Literally, “nevertheless,” i. e., notwithstanding all that had been done, a still farther precaution was exercised by driving in piles, &c.
Pro pariete. Some of the MSS. and editions have pro ariete, which is not so bad a reading as it may at first appear to be ; the piles in question being compared by it to the appearance which a battering-ram present?, when raised for the purpose of inflicting a blow. The Greek paraphrase has also SU^v <cpio5. Still, however, the true lection is pro pariete, the idea intended to be conveyed being that of a buttress, or wall of support.
Et alia item, &c. These last, which Caesar immediately after calls defensores, were merely stakes fixed above the bridge to act os fenders. In the ordinary plans of Caesar’s bridge they are arranged in a triangular form, with the apex of the triangle pointing up the stream. This is all wrong. They were placed in a row, very probably a double one, directly across, from one bank to the other, for in this way alone could they afford perfect security to the structure.
Dejiciendi operis. “For the purpose of demolishing the work.” According to the generality of grammarians, we must here supply causa. (Sanet. Minem. 4, 4.—Vol. ii., p. 49, ed. Bauer.) Zumpt, however, inclines to the opinion, that this form of expression arose from the construction of the genitive with esse. (Zumpt, L. G. p. 388.)
Quibus materia, &c.	“	After	the materials had been begun
to be brought together to the spot.” Compare, as regards the force of quibus, note 4, page 63. Plutarch regards the erection of thi» bridge as a very wonderful act on the part of Caesar. In a late French work, however, on Caesar’s wars, ascribed to the Emperor Napoleon, that distinguished commander is made to say, that this work of Caesar’s has nothing extraordinary in it whatever, and that the bridges constructed over the Danube, in 1809, by General Bertrand, displayed far more skill, the difficulties to overcome being fai
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
gieater.	(Pricis des Guerres de Jules Cisar,	par VEmpereur
Napoleon. Paris, 1836.)
Ad utramque partem. “At either end.” Compare the Greek, ixariptadev rrj; yfyvpas.
Hortantibus iis. “By the advice of those.”—Quos ex Tenchtheris, &c. These were the cavalry, who had taken refuge, as already stated, with the Sigambri, and whom the latter had refused to deliver up to the Romans. Consult chap. 16.
In solitudinem ac silvas. Better than in solitudine ac silvis, as some read. The former expresses the idea of going into a place, and concealing one’s self there ; the latter of being already in tho place before the attempt at concealment is made.
In silvas deponerent. “ Should convey into the woods and deposite there for safe-keeping.” Compare preceding note.
Hunc esse delectum, &c.	“ That this was selected, as being
nearly in the centre of those regions which the Suevi possessed,” i. e., as being almost the centre of their country.
Ulcisceretur. “That he might punish.” Equivalent to 77 puniret.
Satis profectum “That enough had been done by him.” Prjfectum (from proficio, not from proficiscor) is here elegantly ui ed for perfectum, which latter is the reading of some MSS. Compare B. G. 7, 65, uAd reliqui temporis pacem parum profici Livy, 3, 14, “ Ibi plurimum profectum estand Ovid, A. A. 2,
589, “ Hoc tibi profectum Vulcanewith the note of N. Heinsius.
Se in Galliam recepit. His true motive for retreating was the fear entertained by him of the Suevi. Hence Lucan (2, 570) makes Pompey say, that CsBsar fled from the Rhine: “ Rheni gelidis quod fugit ah undis."
Maturce sunt. “ Are early,” i. e., set in early. Compare the Greek, irpoytfnav dvruiv rwv ^eifiu^uv.
In Britanniam, &c. Dio Cassius (39, 53) remarks, that no
benefit whatever resulted either to Caesar himself, or to the state, from this expedition into Britain, and that Caesar’s only motive, in going thither, was the honour of having been the first Roman that invaded the island. Plutarch’s observations are pretty much to the same effect. (Vit. Ccp.s. c. 23.) Suetonius, on the other hand, informs us, that Caesar was attracted thither by the fame of the British pearls. (Vit. Jul. c. 47.) Pliny states, that this commander consecrated to Venus Genitrix a cuirass adorned with British pearls, u ex Britannicis margaritis factum ”	(N. H. 9, 57.1
Digitized by L,ooQleN0TE8 ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
77	«• Inde. “ From that quar'-'T.” Referring to Britain.—Magni
sibi usui. 44A source of great utility to him.” Usui is here put for utilitati. Compare B. C. 2, 8, “ Inventum est magno esse usui posse, si hac esset in altitudinem turris elata.”
Temere. “Commonly.” More literally, “upon any slight occasion,” “ for any alight reason.” The Greek paraphrast renders it by oi pqSiwf.
Quem usum belli haberent. 44 In what way they carried on war.” Compare the version of De Criss6, “ sur la raantere dout cos peuples faisoient la guerre.”—Aut quibus institutis uterentur, “ Or what customs they followed,” i. e., what their customs were.
Caium Volusenum. The punctuation adopted in the text, namely, the comma after Volusenum, connecting it with the preceding clause, is the suggestion of Bentley, who also recommends the insertion of cum before cum. This latter emendation, however, is quite unnecessary.
Promittit. Suetonius (Vit. Jul. 58) states, that Caesar reconnoitred the island in person. Of course the remark must be an erroneous one, since Caesar's own assertion is entitled to far more credit. Some editors, however, and among them Ernesti, have endeavoured, by altering the text of Suetonius, to make it harmonize with that of the commentaries. Consult Crusius ad loc.
Dare. For se daturos. So obtemperare for se cibtemperar turos. Compare B. G. 2, 32, “ Uli se qua imperarentur facerc dixerunt;” and 7, 14, “ Necessario dispersos hostes ex adijicits petere.”
Jg 1. Magni habebatur, 44 Was regarded as extensive.” The genitive of value. More literally, 44 was estimated highly.”
Ut Poputi Romani fidem sequantur. 41 To embrace the alliance of the Roman people.”
3* Quantum ei facultatis, &c.	44	As	far	as	opportunity	could	be
afforded him.”—Qui non auderet. 44 Since he did not venture.” The student will note the force of the subjunctive.
De superioris temporis consilio. 44 For their past conduct.”
Nostra consuetudinis. Alluding to the Roman custom, of exercising humanity towards those who had yielded to their power, and of protecting them from the aggressions of the neighbouring states.
Has tantularum, &c.	44	That	these	engagements	in	such
trifling affairs ought to be preferred by him to Britain,” i. e., to the invasion of Britain
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Navibus onerariis. “ Vessels of burden.” Consult Archaeo- JQ ogical Index.—Navium longarum. “ Of vessels of war. ” Analogous to the Greek /ia<cp£ »Xoui. Consult Archaeological Index.
Legati non venerant. This arose from dissensions among the Morini, some embracing the party of Caesar, others opposing it.
Tertia fere vigilia solvit. “ He set sail about the third watch.” The third watch began at midnight. The place from which Caesar sailed on this occasion was the portus Itius or Iccius, a little south of Calais, and, according to D’Anville, the same with the modem Witsand. {Strabo, 4,5, p. 199, Cas.—D'Anville, Not de la Gaule, p. 389).
Solvit. Supply naves. Literally, “ loosens his vessels,” i. e., from the shore. The full form of expression is given in chapter 36 ; B. C. 1, 28, &c. So in Ovid, Her. 7, 9, “ Certus es, Aenea^ cum foedere solvere naves.1*
Ulteriorem portum. Called superior portus in chapter 28.
Hora diei circiter quarta. “About the fourth hour of the day,” i. e., about ten o’clock in the morning. He sailed, it will be remembered, about midnight.
Britanniam attigit. D’Anville thinks that Cesar landed at the portus Lemanis, now Lymne, a little below Dover.
Expositas hostium copias armatas. “ The fqrces of the enemv
drawn up under arms.”—Cujus loci.	“ Of the spot.”
Adeo montibus, &c.	“	The	sea	was	confined	by	mountains	so
close to it.” Many commentators give angustis, in this passage, the sense of proruptis. But this is erroneous ; the adjective carries with it here the idea rather of something that contracts, or makes narrower, any space. Compare Ramshom, L, G. $ 206, p. 69ft. *
Ad egrediendum* “ For disembarking.” Supply wavibus.
Ad horam nonam. “Until the ninth,” i. e., three o’clock in the afternoon.
Monuitque, dec. “ And cautioned them, that all things should be performed by them at a beck and in a moment, as the principles «f military discipline, and especially as naval operations required,
■since these are characterized by rapid and ever-varying movements.”
More literally, “ have a rapid and unstable motion.” There is a good deal of doubt respecting the latinity of some parts of this passage, and it is more than probable that some corruption has crept Into the text.
ft Sublatis anchoris “ The anchors being weighed.”—Aperts
Digitized by GoogleN0TE8 ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Fag*
ac piano littore. This was probably the portus Lemanis, al’nded to under note 2, page 79.
Et essedariis. “ And Essedarii.” We have preferred an glicizing the Latin term to paraphrasing it in our idiom. By essedarii are meant those who fought from the esseda, or British chariots of war. Essedum is said by the ancient writers to be a word of Gallic origin, and denotes a species of two-wheeled chariot in use among the Gauls and Britons. It is said to have been invented among the Belgae. Compare the authorities cited by Adelung, Gloss. Med. et Inf. Lai. vol. iii., p. 359.
 Quo genere. “ Which kind of force.”—Prohibebant. “Endeavoured to prevent.”
Constitui non poterant.	“	Could	not be moored.”—Ignotis
locis. “ On a strange coast.”—Impeditis manibus.	“	With	their
hands already engaged.”
Et in fluctibus consistendum. “And to keep themselves steady amid the waves.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, lv rip usrtrriov.
Omnibus membris expediti. “Having the free use of all their limbs.”—Notissimis locis. “ In places which they knew perfectly.”
Et equos insuefactos incitarent. “ And spurred on their horses accustomed to such exercise.” Insuefactos, equivalent to valde assuetos.
Quarum ek species, <5tc. “Both whose figure was more novel to the barbarians, and whose movements were quicker for use,” i. e., and which were more easy to be managed. The barbarians, in consequence of the commerce carried on with their shores by the merchants of Gaul, were accustomed to the sight of vessels of burden, but not to the figure of ships of war.
Onerariis navibus. The vessels of burden were employed on this occasion, it will be remembered, as transports.—Et remis incitari. “ And to be rowed briskly forward.”
flQ 1. Fundis. “Byslings.”—Tormentis. “Engines.” The tormenta were engines for discharging heavy iron javelins, large stones. &c. The term itself is derived from torqueo, as referring to the mode of working the machine. Thus, “ tormentum, quasi torqu> mentum, machina, qua tela, saxa, aliave missilia, nervo aut funs contento torquentur et jaciuntur.”
Qua res magno usui, &c.	“	Which	thing	was	of	great	ser
vice to our men.”—Navium. Referring to the vessels of war.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Qui decima legionis, &c.	“	He	who bore the eagle of the
tenth legion.” The eagle, or main standard of the legion, was home by the centurio primi pili, or primopilus, who was the oldest centurion in the legion. Consuit Archaeological Index, s. v., centurio and aquila.
Ea res. “ This thing,” i. e., what he intended to do.—Aqux •am hostibus prodere. It was considered very disgraceful to lose any standard, but particularly so the main one of the legion. Com manders of ten availed themselves of this circumstance, for the purpose of urging on their troops, by casting the standard into the midst \J the foe.
Prastitero. “ Will promptly discharge.” The future per- ect (or, as it is more frequently, but very erroneously called, the future subjunctive) is here used to express prompt execution, the fu tm e being thus represented as already past. Compare Zumpt, L G. y. 320.
Vcentum dedecus. Alluding to the disgrace consequent on the abandonment of their standards. Compare the language of Lip- sius {Mil. Bom. 4, 5), “ Suadebat enim repetere (signa) non poena tantum, qua manebat iis amissis, sed etiam pudor et religio, et quasi dos ac sacra sua prodidissent.”
Ex proximis navibus. All the MSS. have ex proximis prinus navibus, bat we have rejected primis with Hotomann, Scaliger, and some more recent editors, as savouring strongly of a pleonasm. The Greek paraphrast, moreover, has only U rdv iyyvs vtdv. Ou- dendorp, indeed {ad Suet. Cos. 50, p. 82), endeavours to explain ex proximis primis navibus, by making it equivalent to ex iis navi- bus qua in proximo ordine erant prima; few, however, will agree with him.
Cum conspexissent. Supply mdites.
Neque firmiter insistere. “ Nor to get a firm footing.” Literally, “ nor to stand firmly.”—Atque alius alia ex navi, &c. “ And kept joining, one from one vessel, another from another, whatever standard each had chanced to meet,” i. e., the men from different ships being compelled to join whatever standard they first came up with.
Singulares eg edientes. “ Coming forth individually,” or one by one.—Impedites. “ Embarrassed in their movements.”— In universos. “ At our collected force.”
Quod cum animum advertisset. For quod cum animadvertisset. The strict grammatical construction, however, is cum advertisset animum quod, i. e., vertisset animum ad quod.
G o
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
12. Scaphas longarum navium.	“	The	boats belonging to the
ships of war.”—Speculatoria navigia. “ The light vessels of observation,” i. e., spy-vessels. These were light and fast sailing cutters, generally used to explore coasts, and to watch the movements of an enemy’s fleet. According to Vegetius (4, 37), they were painted of a greenish blue colour, in order to escape observation. The sails and cordage were also greenish blue, and even the dress of the mariners and soldiers on board. “ Ne tamen exploratoriae naves candore prodantur, colore veneto (qui marinis est fluctibus similis) vela tinguntur et funes : cera etiam qua ungere solent naves inficitur. Nauta, quoque et milites venetam vestem induunt, ut non solum per noctem, sed etiam per diem facilius lateant explorantes." With regard to the “ cera” mentioned in this passage, consult Pliny, H.N. 35,11.
Simul. For simul ac. “ As soon as.”
Equites. Alluding to the cavalry which had embarked in the eighteen transports. These had not been able to “ hold on their course and reach the island.” It will be seen, from chapter 28, that they had encountered a violent storm. Tenere cursum is applied to a vessel passing with a favourable wind to her point of destination, and is well explained in the Greek paraphrase by tlOvSpofitlv.
Legatos. Dio Cassius (39, 51) says, that these ambassador* were some of the Morini, who were on friendly terms with them: ■nifiirovoi irpbs rbv Kaloapa tw» Moplvutv Ttva$, <f>i\<t>v c<plaiv Svtojv.
ft ]	1. Supra. Consult chapter 21.
Oratoris modo. “ In character of ambassador.” We have recalled these words into the text with some of the best editors. They are found in numerous MSS., and in all the early editions until the Aldine. The reason urged for their omission is, that they savour of a mere gloss. But it may be stated, on the other hand, that the Greek paraphrase has &s npioSw, and, besides, that Csesar would very naturally employ the words in question, to show that the laws of nations had been violated by the barbarians, in imprisoning a Roman ambassador.
Remiserunt. “ They sent him back.”—Contulerunt. “ Laia
—Propter imprudentiam.	“ On account of their indiscretion,” L
e., as it was merely an act of indiscretion.
Continentem. Referring to Gaul.
Arcessitam. “ Sent for,” i. e., since they had to be sent for.
—Remigrare iri agros. “To retire to their lands,” i. e., to go
y Google'NOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
back to their usual occupations, the war being at an end.—Comae- g j mre. Many editions have convenere, which is inferior, and makes the sentence flow less smoothly.
Post diem quartam quam, &c.	“	On	the	fourth	day	after.”
—Supra demonstratum est. Consult chapter 23.
Cursum tenere. “ Hold on its course,” i. e., make any head* way. Compare the Greek ei>9vSp6}itiv.—Referrentur. “ Were car* ried back.”
Quae est propius, &c.	“	Which	lies	more	to	the west.”—
Dejicerentur. Ciacconius, without any necessity, reads rejicerentur.
The verb dejicere is very properly employed here, as the vessels M were carried down” to the lower part of the island.
Cum. “ When.”—Necessario adversa nocte, &c. “ Having, through necessity, put to sea during an unfavourable night.”
Qui dies. “ Which period,” i. e., which day of the month.
All the MSS. have this reading. Some editions, however, omit dies, and have merely quae, which then refers to luna. Compare, however, the following expressions : “ Jussu Pompeii, qua manr data” (B. C. 3, 22) ; and, 11 Ante comitia, quod tempus.” (Sallust, B. I. 36. Compare Cortius, ad loc.) So also Horat. Od. 4,
14, “ Idus tibi sunt agenda, Qui dies” &c.
Nostrisque id erat incognitum. The Romans were accustomed to the navigation of the Mediterranean, where the tides are comparatively slight, and in some parts of which they hardly deserve the name.
Afflictabat. “ Broke from their moorings and dashed against each other.”—Administrandi. “ Of managing them.”
Totius exercitus, &c. Count Turpin de Criss6 censures C®- gg sar very deservedly, for his imprudence in making this descent upon Britain, before he had either obtained an accurate knowledge of the coasts of the island, or had procured a sufficient supply of provisions. Caesar’s wonted good fortune, however, once more saved him.
Quod omnibus constabat. “ Because it was evident to all.” Literally, “ because it was agreed upon by all.”—His in locis. Referring to Britain.
Exiguitate. “ The small size.”—Hoc. «* On this account.”
4r Rem producere. “ To prolong the war.”—Reditu. Hoto-
mann very unnecessarily conjectures auditu. By reditu is meant, of course, a return to Gaul.—Ex agris deducere. Compare the conclusion of chapter 27.	“ Suos remigrare in agros jusserunt.”
5 Ex eventu navium suarum. “ From what had happened toNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
Page.
his ships.” Compare Hirtius, B. G. 8, 21 : “ Qua Bellovacorum speculabantur eventum;” and Livy, 33, 48 : “ Ita Africa Hannibal excessit, scepius patrice, quam suorum eventus miseratus.”
Et ex eo quod intermiserant. “ And from their having inter milted.” Literally, “ and from this circumstance, because they had intermitted.”
Ad omnes casus. “ Against every emergency.” More lit erally, “ against everything that might happen.”
Gravissime afflicta. “ Most seriously injured.”—Aere. Thr Romans made use of brass in the construction of their ships more frequently than iron. Thus, they covered the rostrum or beak, anc occasionally the sides, with this metal. The nails or spikes, also, employed in securing the timbers of the vessel, were generally o! this same metal. Compare Vegetius (5, 4): “ Utilius configitur Liburna clavis areis quam ferreis.” It must be borne in mind, that what we here call brass was, strictly speaking, a kind of bronze. The term as is indiscriminately used by the Roman writers to denote copper, brass, or bronze. It was not till a late period that mineralogists, in order to distinguish them, gave the name of cuprum to copper. The oldest writer who uses the word cuprum is Spartianus (Fi/. Caracall. c. 9), which appears to have been formed from the cyprium of Plmy (H. N. 33, 5).
Reliquis ut navigari, Ac. “ He brought it to pass, that it could be safely navigated with the rest,” i. e., he enabled himself to put to sea safely with the rest.
Hominum. Referring to the Britons, not to the Romans. Compare the Greek paraphrase : pfpovs t&v Bperav&v in iv rois iypoTg fuv6vT<av. The British chieftains, it will be remembered, had at first disbanded their forces, and then had begun to withdraw them secretly from the fields again, in order to renew hostilities. The persons mentioned in the text are those who still remained in the fields (i. e., at home), and had not yet obeyed the latter call.
Pars etiam in castra ventitaret. UA part kept even coming frequently into our camp.” Compare the Greek, pfpov: to real b rip rutv fPto/ialwv arparoniScp &api£6vT<av.
In statione. “ On guard.”—Quam consuetudo ferret. “ Than was customary.” Literally, “ than custom used to bring with it.” —In ea parte, &c. Compare note 7, page 5.
L In stationem succedere. “ To take their post,” i. e., to sue ceed them as a guard for the gates. Compare the Greek, Hr buhw*
rdrov Siadf^t^u.NOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK,
Page.
Et, conferta legione, &c.	“ And that, the legion being crowd- g3
ed together, darts were hurled upon it from ah sides.”
Quod. “ Inasmuch as.”—Ex reliquis partibus. “ From the other parts of the adjacent, country.”—Pars una. “ One quarter.”
Paucis interfectis. Dio Cassius (39, 52) makes the loss to have been a more serious one.—Reliquos incertis ordinibus, &c.
“ They threw the rest into confusion for want of knowing their lanks.” The Romans were out of their ranks, and mowing down the grain when the enemy attacked them. Hence the confusion which ensued from their inability to regain their ranks in so sudden an onset.
Genus hoc est, &c.	“	Their	manner	of fighting from chariots
is as follows.”—Per omnes partes. “ In every direction.” Com pare the Greek : vavroOev.
Ipso terrore equorum, &c.	“ By the very alarm occasioned to
the horses of the foe, and the noise of their wheels,” i. e., by the alarm which they excite in the horses of the foe, through their rapid movements up and down, and the rattling of their chariot wheels.
Cum se insinuaverint. “ When they have insinuated them*- selves,” i. e., have worked their way into.
Aurigce. “The charioteers.” Each chariot held two persons, the auriga, or driver, and the essedarius, or one who fought.
So, in Homeric Antiquities, the chariot is called 6i<ppog (quasi &l<po- pog), from its carrying two persons (Jfc and <pip<a)y namely, the charioteer, or bvlo^og, and the warrior, or irapaiBdrrjs. (Terpstra, Antiq.
Horn. p. 306.)
Atque ita cum, &c.	“	And	place themselves in such a situa
tion with their chariot, that if their masters are overpowered by a number of the foe, they may have a ready retreat to their friends.”
By illi are here meant the essedarii.
Ita mobilitatem, &c. “Thus they exhibit in battles the agility of horse, the steadiness of foot,” i. e., they answer a double porpose, serving both for cavalry and infantry.
Incitatos equos sustinere. “To rein in their horses when at full gallop.” Sustinere is here equivalent to retinere. Compare Ovid, Fast. 5, 301:
“ Scepe Jovem vidi, cum jam sua mittere vellet Fulmina, ture dato sustinuisse manum.”
Et- brevi, &c “ And in one instant to manage and tam them.” Many editors supply loco after brevi, but the sense requires an ellipsis of tempore.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOR.
33	13.	Qutbus rebus. “ In this state of affairs.” Quibus rebus
may also be the dative, depending on tulit. The former construction, however, is the simpler of the two.
ConstiteruiU. 44 Stood motionless,” i. e., stopped driving to and fro with their chariots.
Lacessendum. Some of the later editions, contrary to the best MSS., insert hostem after this wordl Compare Livy, 33, 7, and Virgil, JEn. 5, 429.
Reduxit. Caesar here very artfully glosses over what was in reality a kind of flight on his part. Hence Lucan (2, 572) makes Pompey say of him on this occasion, 44 Territa quasitis ostendit terga Britannis.”
Qui erant in agris, &c.	44	The	rest	of	the	Britons,	who	were
in the fields, departed,” i. e., left the fields to join the army of their countrymen. Compare chapter 32.
Continuos complures dies. 44 For very many days in succession.”
84 i Suis pradicaverunt. 44 Published to their countrymen.”— Sui liberandi. 44 Of freeing themselves,” i. e., from the Roman yoke, with which they were threatened.—His rebus. 44 By these means.”
Nactus equites circiter triginta. 44 Having got about thirty horse.” This small number surprises some of the commentators, who therefore read CCC. (i. e., trecentos, “three hundred”) instead of XXX. {triginta). But the MSS. have all the latter number, and the Greek paraphrase, too, gives rpidsovra. A parallel instance occurs in the commentaries on the African war (c. 6), where less than thirty Gallic horse put to flight two thousand Mauritanian cavalry.
Ante dictum est, &c. Compare chapters 21 and 27.
Quos tanto spatio, &c.	44 Our men having pursued them as
for as their speed and strength enabled them,” i. e., as far as their strength enabled them to run. Literally, 44 having pursued them over as great a space as they were able to traverse by running and strength.”
Omnibus longe laXeque, &c.	44	All	things	far	and	wide	being
prostrated and burnt.” Afflictis is here equivalent to eversis or stratis. The common text has merely in place of afflictis incensis- que, the reading cedifidis incensis.
Propinqua die cequinoctii. 44 The equinox being at hand. ” In the 20th chapter, it was said, 44 exigua parte astatis reliqua,” &c. Hence the autumra equinox is here, of course, meant “Hie eaui-
Digitized by LiOOQleNOTES ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
rage.
nox (or time when the days and nights are equal, over all the globe) g£ happens twice a year, on the 22d of March and 22d of September, the former being called the vernal, the latter the autumnal equinox.
Hiemi navigationem subjiciendam. “ That his voyage ought to be exposed to a storm.” The weather about the time of the equinox is generally very stormy.
 Eosdem, quos reliqua, &c. “ Were all able to make the same port with the rest.”—Paulo infra. “ A little lower down,”
e., lower down along the Gallic coast.
Quibus ex navibus. “ From these two ships.” Referring to the two naves oneraria, or transports.
Non ita magno numero. “With no very large number.”
Jta in such phrases is equivalent to valde. Consult TurseUin. Part. Lot., and Scheller, Pracept. Styl. vol. i., p. 208.
Orbe facto. The orb, or circular order, was a disposition of which Caesar speaks in his commentaries, as highly advantageous in cases of danger and extremity. It was resorted to on the present occasion as a means of defence.
Horis. Some editors read horas, which requires an ellipsis 85 of quam. The ablative, however, is more customary with Caesar.
Propter siccitates paludum. “ On account of the dryness of the marshes.” The marshes, which had formerly protected them, and had served as a barrier against the Romans, were now dry, it being the end of summer. Hence they were deprived of their usual place of retreat.
Quo perfugio, &c. “ Of which refuge they had availed themselves the year before.” The MSS. and editions vary here in a surprising degree. We have given the reading which harmonizes with the Greek paraphrase : ratfrp yap rjj intoyapfiau Ttj> irodoOev tret
UiyjprjvTO.
Duxerant. Compare chapter 22.—Omnibus eorum agris vas- latis, &c. Caesar appears to have acted here upon the principle, that severe measures alone could check the natural tendency of the Gauls for insurrection and change.
Eo. “Thither,” i. e., to his winter quarters among the Belgae.—Reliqua neglexerunt. Dio Cassius (40, 1) assigns this circumstance as a pretext on the part of Caesar for making a second descent on Britain.
Supplicatio. Compare Suetonius (Vit. Cas. c. 24), “ Prospere decentibus rebus, et sapius et plurimum quam quisquam die» rum supplicationes impetravit.” Consult also note 11, page 50.
Digitized by GoogleBOOK V
Pfc*e
1. Lucio Domitio, &c. A. U. C. 700, B. C. 54.—Italiam. Hith er, or Cisalpine, Gaul is meant. This was Caesar’s province.
Demonstrat.	“	He	points	out,’*	i.	e.,	gives	a plan of.—Sub
ductionesque. “ And drawing them on shore.” Compare chap. 11. Subducei e naves is to draw vessels on shore ; deducere naves, to draw them down from the land into the water.
Nostro mari. The Mediterranean. Compare Mela, 1, 1: “Id omne, qua venit, quaque dispergitur, uno vocabulo nostrum mare dicitur”
Has amnes actuarias, &c.	“ He ordered them all to be made
of a light co98Uo»otion, to which purpose their lowness in the water contribute# greatly.” By actuaria naves are meant vessels remarkable for lightness and swiftness, and so called from the ease with which they were impelled (quia facile agi potuerunt). They were managed by sails and oars, having but one bank of the latter, or, at farthest two. Compare Livy (33, 38): “ Decem naves actuarias (nulla quarum plus quam triginta remis^agatur) habeto.”
Ad armandas naves. “ For equipping the vessels.”—Ex Hispania. Among other things requisite for fitting out ships, Spain furnished large quanti ties of Spartum, or Spanish broom, much used for making ropes/ Compare Strabo, 3, p. 160, and Plin. H. N. 19, 2.
Illyricum. This country, it will be remembered, was attached to, and formed part of, Caesar’s province of Hither Gaul. The whole province was Cisalpine or Hither Gaul, Illyricum, and Transalpine Gaul. Compare Suetonius, Vit. Cces. c. 22.
jQmnibu# rktionibus. “ By all reasonable means,” i. e , to make qvety reasonable compensation for the injury.
1. Civitatem. “ Their whole state.”—Arbitros inter civitates dat, 6lc. “ He appoints arbitrators among the states, to estimate the damage, and fix the compensation.” Compare the language of For- cellini, in explanation of the phrase aslimare litem “ AestimareNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Page.
fctcm est, decernere quanta pecunia a reo post damnationem solven- gQ io sit: atque hac ratione lis ponitur pro re de qua lis est.11
Conventibusque peractis. Compare note 15, page 33. The idea intended to be conveyed by this phrase is, that the business of the supreme tribunal of the province had been performed in its several circuits.
Sexcentas. Lipsius thinks this number incredible, considering the shortness of the time; but the reference is to old vessels that had been repaired, as well as to new ones that had been built.
Cujus supra demonstravimus. Referring to the naves actually mentioned in~the previous chapter. Cujus is here put by attraction for quod, in imitation of the Greek.
Instructas. “ Got ready.” The proper term to be employed in such cases. Some editions have constructas, which is far inferior, and does not suit the number of vessels as well as instructas. Compare note 3.
Neque multum abesqe, &c.	“ And that there was not much
wanting of their being able to be launched in a few days,” i. e., and that not many days were required to make them fit for launching.
Portum Itium. Consult Geographical Index, and compare note 9, page 78. — Transmissum. “ Passage aocoss.” —A con tinenti. “ From the continent,” i. e., from the continent of GaoU to the island of Britain; or, as we would say, from land to land.
Huic rei. “ For this purpose,” i. e., to execute these orders. Compare the Greek paraphrase, irpbs rb bi ravra Sidrparrttv. ,
Expeditis. “Disencumbered of baggage.*. Supply ivipedx
mentis, and compare note 11, page 42.	s,	»
Cingetorix. O’Brien, in his Irish and English- Dictionary, makes this name equivalent in Celtic to Cin-go-toir, i. e., “caput ad expeditionem” with Ver (“ a man”) prefixed. The name will then signify, the chief, or leader, of an expedition. Sir W. Beetham, on the other hand (“ The Gael and Cymbri,” p. 197), makes the name come from cingead, “ valiant,” and rig, “ a king,” with a similar prefix of Ver.
11 .Alter. Referring to Cingetorix.-^ Confirmavit. “Assurgi him.”
Silvam Arduennam. * Hie forest ^rduehna,” i. ©., the forest of Ardennes. Compare B G. 6, 29, and consult Geographical Index. The student will man» he construction in silvam Arduennam abditis, which implies a gojjf or conveying into the wood, previous to the act of concealment, whereas in silva Arduenna ah-
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
ditit would mean that the persons concealed had been in the wood some period befoie the concealment took place.
Quoniam civitati consulere rum possent. “ Since they could not take any measures for the common welfare.” The dissensions between Indutiomarus and Cingetorix prevented them from doing anything for the interests of the state at large, and they therefore came to Caesar to entreat his protection for themselves individually-
Laberetur. “ Might fall off,” i. e., might revolt.—Itaque esse
civitatem, &c.	“	That	the	state,	therefore, was completely under
his control.”
Permissurum. Some read commissurum, but the former is the true lection. The distinction between committere and permittere is drawn by Cicero, Verr. 2, 1, 32, “ Incommoda sua nostris committere legibus, quam dolori suo permittere maluerunt
Quaque eum res, dec. “ And what cause detained him from
his projected purpose.”—Omnibus ad Brittanicum, dec. “ When everything was prepared for the British war,” i. e., now that everything was ready, dec.	^
Nominatim. “Expressly.”—Consolatus, dec. “He consoled Indutiomarus, and exhorted him,” dec. Caesar consoled Indutiomarus, for the temporary deprivation of his son and relations, whom he intended carrying with him, as hostages, into Britain, and assured him that they should suffer no injury.
Hos singillatim, dec. “ He reconciled these, man by man, to Cingetorix.”—Quod cum merito, dec. “ This he both thought was done by him in accordance with the deserts of the latter, and at the same time imagined it was greatly his interest, that the authority of one, whose signal attachment towards himself he had clearly per reived, should be as great as possible among his own countrymen.”
Suam gratiam, dec. “ That his influence was lessened among his countrymen.” His influence was lessened by the reconciliation which had been effected between Cingetorix and the other chieftains.—Multo gravius hoc dolore exarsit. “ Blazed out with augmented fury, through resentment at this.”
In Meldis. The Meldi here referred to were situate on the Scaldis, or Scheldt, between what are now Gand and Bruges. Some editors, imagining that there was only one Gallic tribe of this name, that situate on the Mediterranean coast, have changed Meldis into Belgis, but the old reading is correct.
Antea dictum est. Compare book 1, chapter 3.
Cupidum novarum rerum “ Fond of change,’’ i. e., fond of
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Pafa.
colitical changes, or of revolutions in the state.—Magm antmi. QQ “ Of a high spirit.”
Jam. “ Already before this.”—Sibi deferri, “ Was bestowed upon him.” Was vested in him.
Recusandi aut deprecandi causa. “ For the purpose either ol refusing his appointment, or entreating to have it revoked.”
Id factum. “ This fact.”—Ex suis hospitibus. “ From his tr ends.” More literally, “ from those connected with him by the ties of hospitality.”
Petere contendit. “ Strove to obtain.”—Religionibus. “ By religious scruples.” What these were we are not informed. Ho- tomann thinks, that the allusion is to the performance of some vow, prof funeral rites,while Rhellicanus and Glandorp suppose Dumnorix to have pretended that the omens or auspices were unfavourable. This latter is the more probable opinion.
Obstinate. “ Peremptorily.”—Sevocare singulos. “ To call them aside one by one.”
Non sine causa fieri, &c.	“	That	it	was	not	done without
some secret motive, that Gaul was stripped of all her nobility.”
Hos omnes in Britanniam, &c. Alluding to the hostages which Caesar intended taking with him into Britain, as a means of keeping the Gauls quiet during his absence.—Fidem reliqui? interponere. “He pledged his word to the rest.”—Quod esse exusu,
4tc. “ Whatever they should understand to be for the interest of Gaul.”
Quod tantum, &c.	“	Because	he had ever paid so much
respect to the Aeduan state.”
Quod longius, &c. “And that, since he saw his mad folly going too far, he ought to take care, lest the other might have it in his power to do any injury to himself and the Roman government.”
The construction of the latter part of the clause is, prospiciendum (esse sibi, i. e., Caesari) ne (ille, i. e., Dumnorix) posset nocere quid sibi (Caesari) cue reipublicce.
Corus ventus. “The northwest wind.” Some editions have Caurus ventus, but the form Corus is more common. The wind here meant is the same with the tyyierris of the Greeks.
: 3. Nihilo tamen secius, &c.	“	But	still,	not	the less on that
account, to make himself acquainted with all his designs.” Supply uI before cognoiceret* from the previous clause.
14. Omnium impeditis animis. “ While the attention of all was engaged,” i. e., with the embarcation.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
91 i- Hunc. Referring to Dumnorix.—Pro sano. “ As a prudent man,” i. e., as might be expected from, or as became, a prudent man. Literally, “as a man in his senses.”—Qui neglexisset. u Since he had slighted.” The student will note the force of the relative here with the subjunctive mood.
Enim. “ However.” Enim is here used as an adversative particle, with the force of autem, instances of which are of no unfrequent occurrence in Tacitus, Plautus, and other writers. Compare the words of Gronovius {ad Liv. 34, 32), “ Observarunt eruditi ex Plauto, hanc particulam (enim) interdum a fronte orationis induere vim adversativa.”
Rem frumentariam. The common text has rei frumentaria, but the accusative is far preferable. Consult Sanctius, Min. 3, 3, vol. i., p. 514.
Consiliumque pro tempore, &c.	“	And	might take measures
according to time and circumstance,” i. e., such measures as time and circumstance might require.
Pari numero equitum, &c.	“	A	body	of	cavalry equal to that
which he was leaving on the continent.” The student will mark the elegance of the construction in the text. It is equivalent to numero equitum pari ei numero quem relinquebat. The number of horse referred to is two thousand.
Leni Africo. “ By a gentle southwest wind.” The south west wind was called Africus by the Romans, because coming to them in the direction of Africa Propria, the modern district of Tunis.
Longius delatus astu. “ Being carried down a considerable distance by the tide.” Longius, literally, “ a greater distance than
^ordinary.”—Sub sinistra relictam. “ Far away on the left.”
Secutus. “ Having taken advantage of.”
Virtus. “ The patient endurance.” Virtus here denotes patient endurance of the fatigue of rowing, or, in other words, bodily labour resolutely endured.—Vectoriis gravibus que navigiis. “Though in transports and heavily laden vessels.”
Cum annotinis. “With the ships employed the previous year.” More literally, “with the ships of the previous year.” Annotinus means, “ of only one year.” Compare the Greek paraphrase : etov rdif rod wpdodev erovf. Some, very incorrectly, read annonariis, referring to vessels of burden used in transporting' provisions.
Sid commodi. Supply causa So in Greek Ivixa is often understood.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
isgu.
Cohortibus decem. Ten cohorts formed a legion, and die Qj complement of cavalry for each legion was three hundred. Caesar, however, calls the force referred to “ ten cohorts,” and not “ one <*gion,” most probably because the cohorts in question belonged to
A fferent legions.
Eo minus ventus navibus. A somewhat unusual phrase,
i-jrt occurring also in Cicero, Acad. 4, 45, “ Vos mihi veremini.”
In littore molli atque aperto. “On a smooth and open shore.” impare the explanation of Morus: “ Molli, nullis scopulis pericu *o ; aperto, nullis rupibus aut prominentiis impedito.”
Crebris arboribus succisis. The trees thus felled were 92 a*ced together in form of an abattis or breastwork.-*-Pr<ec/im
iliocked up.”
Fivpugnabant. “ Came forth to fight.”
Testudine. Consult Archaeological Index.—Aggere ai munitiones adjecto. u A mound having been thrown up against the fortifications of the enemy.” A mound is properly said to be thrown up, fwei ; while a tower is said agi (or excitari. B. G. 5,
40).
Milites. “ The foot.” Milites is here opposed to equites, and is to be taken, therefore, in the sense of pedites. So m the 61st chapter of the 7th book, “ exercitus equitatusque.”
Superiore nocte. “ On the preceding night.”—Afflictas, &c.
'* Had been dashed against each other, and driven on shore,” Some read in littus, but in littore is more graphic, since it implies, that the vessels had not only been driven on shore, but were still lying there.
Subsisterent. “Could hold out,” L e., could stand firm against. Compare Livy, 27, 7, “ Vix Annibali atque ejus arms subsistentem.11
Ex eo concursu navium. “ From this collision of the vessels,” i. e., from the ships thus running foul of one another.
Coram perspicit. “ He sees with his own eyes,” i. e., before him, on the spot. Compare the Greek paraphrase, x^Pav avroc bvravda Kareidev.—Magno negotio. “ With great trouble.”
Fabros. “The artificers.” Each legion had its proper complement of artificers. Compare Vegetius, 2, 11, “ Habet praterea legio fabros lignariosf instructores, carpentarios, ferrarios” &c., and consuit Stevoecehius, ad loc. p. 168. Under the term fabri Caesar here includes the fabri lignarii, or carpenters, and the fabri ferrarii, or smiths.
H h
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
rvgo.
1)2	10- Ut quam plurimas,” &c.	41	To build as many vessel* a*
possible with the legions that are with him,” i. e., with the legion» which he commanded.
Q3 1. Subduci. “To be drawn on shore.” Supply in aridum The full form is given B. G. 4, 29.—Una munitione. “ By on» general fortification,” i. e., the same rampart and ditch were to encompass the vessels and the tents.
Unde. Referring to the place where he was when the newt reached him of the disaster of his vessels.
Summa imperii, &c. “ The supreme command and directiop of the war.”—Cassivellauno. The derivation which Sir William Beetham gives for this proper name is extremely amusing, and show» the reckless handiwork of a professed etymologist. He deduces it from Cass, a man’s name, and bealln “ a little mouth,” and makes Cassivellaunus equivalent, therefore, to “Cass with the little mouth!”
 Superiore tempore.	“ At a former period.”— Continentia,
Put for continua. So continentes silva (B. G. 3, 28), and continentes paludes (B. G. 6, 31).
Quos natos, &c.	“	Who	they	say it has been handed down
by tradition were bom in the island itself,” i. e., of whom they have a tradition that they were sprung from the very soil of the island itself. This is in accordance with the erroneous, but very preva lent, belief among so many of the nations of antiquity, that their first ancestors were produced or bom from the earth. 'I’hc Athe mans in particular were remarkable for this, and hence the name abrdxOoves which they applied to their race. Thus Thucydides ro marks (1, 2), rffv yovv 'Amicf)* dvBptoiroi taxovv o\ alroi dtl. Where tho scholiast adds, r$ ylvei Stf\ov6ri, oh yap ifaav iOdvarot. The most ancient nations thought themselves indigenous, because, having long dwelt in the same country, they at length forgot their origin.
Quibus orti ex civitatibus. “ From which being sprung.” Civitatibus is here repeated with the relative, according to Caesar's not unfrequent custom. Compare note 7, page 5.—Bello IUato. “ The war having been waged,” i. e., when the war was over.
Hominum est infinita multitudo. “ The number of inhabitants is unbounded,”. i. e., the population is immense.—Gallicis consimilia. Compare Joraandes 2, 2 : “ Virgeas habitant casas communia tecta cum pecore, silvaque illis sape sunt domus”
Utuntur aut are, &c.	“	They	employ	for money either cop
per v oblong pieces of iron, ascertained to be of a certain weight.*1
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Literally, “ tried by a certain weight.” The term tains, in this 93 passage, occasions great trouble to the commentators, and they give it, generally speaking, the meaning of “ rings,” because the Greek paraphrast 'tenders it by iaKTvXloig. Nothing, however, can be more erroneous than this interpretation. Talea properly denotes a wood*
•n pin, or small piece of wood shaped like a spike, used in architecture for connecting together the timbers of an edifice. ( Vitruv.
5.) It is then applied to agricultural operations, and means a small branch of a tree, sharpened like a spike or stake, and planted in the ground to produce another tree. (Varro, R. R. 1, 40.) C®8ar employs the term here in precisely the same sense, as far as regards shape ; but as talea properly means something of wood, he appends the adjective ferreus, in order to show that die talea here meant were pieces of iron. The Britons, therefore, according to him, employed for money either copper, or small pieces of iron shaped like spikes. This view of the subject receives a striking confirmation from the custom said to have prevailed among the earlier Greeks. The earlier MoXbg, according to ancient authorities, denoted originally ((a spit,’* i. e., a piece of iron or copper fashioned like a small spit, and used for money, and six of these made a drachma (6paxpti)i or, “ handful,” these being, as many as the hand can grasp. Consult on this point, Plutarch, Vit. Lys. c. 17. Julius PoUmx,
9,6, $ 77, who refers to Aristotle in support of this assertion. Eus tath, ad R. 1, 465. Etymol. Mag. s. v., ifaXtasos.
Nascitur ibi plumbum album. “ Tin is found there.” Literally, “is produced there.” By plumbum album is meant tho Kaaotripos of the Greeks. Compare Plin. H. N. 36, 16. The tin mines of England are situated in Cornwall, which occupies the southwestern extremity of the country.—In mediterraneis regionibus.
This statement of Cmsar’s is incorrect. Tin is not brought from the interior.
Materia. “ Wood,” i. e., trees.—Fagum. “The beech.”
The ftrybs of Dioscorides (1, 121), and il;6a of Theophrastus (3,10). '
Animi voluptatisque causa. “For the sake of amusement and pleasure.—Loca sunt temperatiora, &c. “The climate is more temperate than in Gaul, the cold being less intense.” The account which Tacitus gives of the climate of Britain (Vit. Ague.
12), agrees very well with what it is at present: “ Coelum crebris mbrilnis ac nebulis foedum: asperitas frigorum abest.”
Triquetra. “ Triangular.” This, taking the general form of the island, is not very far from the truth. C»sar must have ob>
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Pag*.
Q3 tained his information, respecting the shape of the island, from the account of others, since Britain was not circumnavigated by the Romans till the time of Agricola. {Tacit. Agric. 10.) In the same way are we to account for Cesar’s acquaintance with the manners and customs of the Britons, since he never penetrated into the interior.
Ad Cantium. “At Kent.”—Ad orientem solem. Supply spectat.—Tenet circiter, <fcc. “ Contains about five hundred miles.” Measuring in a straight line from Bolerium Promontoriuo, or Land's End, to Cantium Promontorium, or North Foreland the distance does not exceed 344 British, or 356 Roman miles. If Cesar included the irregularities of the coast, the measurement would be greatly enlarged.
Ad Hispaniam. This statement is very erroneous, as Spam lies to the south, not to the west of Britain.
94	1. Dimidio minor, &c.	“	Less	than	Britain,	as	is	supposed, by
a half.” The superficial extent of Great Britain is computed at 77,370 square miles, and that of Ireland at 30,370 *, hence the magnitude of the former is upward of two and a half times that of the latter.
Sed pari spatio transmissus, &c.. “ But the passage across to Britain is the same distance as from Gaul.”
Mona. The Isle of Man. Consult Geographical Index.—
Complures praterea minores, &c.	"	Besides	several	other	smaller
islands are thought to lie facing in the channel.” Some read subjecta for objecta, but the Greek paraphrase has irriKtioOai. The Orkney and Shetland Islands are meant, but that they are properly speaking objecUe is, of course, untrue.
Dies continuos triginta, &c.	“	That	there is night for thirty
successive days at the winter-solstice,” i. e., 22d December. This report was without any foundation in truth.
Nisi certis ex aqua, &c.	“	But	we	perceived, by accurato
water measures, that the nights were shorter than on the continent,”
e., but measuring the time by water-glasses, &c. The allusion here is to the clepsydra, or, as we would call it, water-clock. The clepsydra, as its name imports, was a Grecian invention, and was first adopted at Rome m the third consulship of Pompey. {Auctor dial, de caus. cor. eloq. 38.) In the most common kind of water- clocks, the water issued drop by drop through a hole in one vessel, and fell into another, in which a light body that floated marked the height of the fluid as it rose, by pointing to a scale of hours on the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
side of the vessel, and thus indicated the time. All the depsy- Q,| drat, however, had this defect in common, that the water at first flowed out rapidly, and afterward more slowly, so that they required much care and «-egulation. Consult Beckman, History of Intentions, vo’ p. 136.
Septingentorum millium. 44 Seven hundred miles." A cal culation which exceeds the truth 90 Roman miles. The length of the western coast is 590 British, nearly equal to 610 Roman, miles.
Conti a Septentriones. 44 Opposite the north.” This is not correct; the east is much nearer the truth.—Octingenta. This greatly exceeds the real measurement. The exact length is about 550 British, or 570 Roman, miles.
 Humanissimi^ “ The most civilized.”—A Gallica consuetudine. “From the customs of Gaul.” Compare B. G. 6, 21,
4 Germani multum ab hac consuetudine differunt.”
Se vitro injiciunt. 44 Stain themselves with woad,” i. e., of a blue colour. The Greek name for this plant is isatis ; its other appellation in Latin, besides vitruniy is glasturr^ This last is supposed to be derived from the old British word glasy which means not only 44green,” but also “blue.” The Romans, it is thought, confounded the glas of the Britons with the old German word glas, applied first to 44 amber,” and afterward to 44 glass,” and hence gave the name of vitrum to the plant in question.
Atque hoCy &c.	44	And	hence	they	are	of	a	more	frightful
appearance in battle.” The Greek paraphrast very neatly expresses this by, &rre Iv ral{ fidyaif KaTairXljKTiKt&raroi rb Stdfid ttai.
Capilloque sunt promisso, &c. “They have, moreover, long hair, and every part of the body shaved except,” &c.— Uxores habent, &c. The order is, deni duodenique (Britanni) habent uxores communes inter se. Render deni duodeniquet 44 parties of ten or twelve.”
Quo primum, &c.	44	By whom each female when a virgin
was first married.” With deducta est supply domum, and compare the phrase ducere domum, 44 to marry.”
Tamen ut. 44 In such a way, however, that,” i. e., with so little success that. Before tamen supply it a, and consult Palairet, Ellips. Lot. p. 157.
Cupidius insecuti. 44 Our men having pursued them too
eagerly.”—Till.	Referring to the Britons.— Intermisso spatio.
44 Some interval having elapsed.”—Imprudentibus nostris. 44 Our men not expecting t*em.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Submissi». 44 Being sent to their aid.” Put for Caesar** nure usual form of expression, subsidio missis. Oudendorp is in favour of immissis.
Atque his prinus, dec. “ And these the first of two legions.** The first cohort of a legion not only exceeded the rest in number, but contained the bravest men. Thus Vegetius remarks (2, 6), “ Prima cohors reliquas et numero militum et dignitate procedit.91 Lipsius, however, insists, that what Vegetius here says about superiority of numbers merely applies to later warfare, and that the first cohort only surpassed the rest in its containing braver men. (Mil. Rom. 1, dial. 4, p. 67, seq.)
Cum ho, dec. u When these had taken their ground at a very small distance from each other.” The common text incorrectly punctuates after spatu>f connecting inter se with constitissent. The Greek paraphrast gives the true meaning, faiydv 4r* dargovadr.
Perruperunt. Supply hostes.—Immissis. 44 Being sent out against them.” Compare the Greek, sXn&tms l*e\6ovaQv
Cum dimicaretur. 44 As the battle was fought.”—Intellectum est. Supply a nobis. “We perceived.”
Cedentes. “ Those who gave ground.**
Dimicare. Before this word prolio occurs in some editions. But, as it does not appear in many MSS., and is not at all needed, we have thrown it out.—IUi. Referring to the Britons.
Et pedibus, dec. “ And fought with great advantage on foot.” Literally, 44 fought on foot in unequal combat.”—Equestris autem proelii ratio, dec. “ The manner of fighting, however, on the part of the British horse, brought with it equal and the same danger to our cavalry, whether the fonder retreated or pursued.” Compare the explanation of Lemaire : “ Ratio qua equites Britanni pugnabant idem periculum Ron.anis inferebat, seu ii (Barbari scii.) cederent seu insequerentur.”
Conferti. 44 In close array.”—Ran. “ Scattered here and
there.” The reference is to the cavalry of the Britons.—Atque alii alios, &c.	44	And kept relieving one another in succession,
while the vigorous and fresh took the places of those that were wearied.”
Ijenius. 44 With less spirit ”
Sic, uti ab signis, dtc. 44 With so much fury, as to be close op with tbs standards and legions.” Non absisterent, literally, 44 not to stand „t a distance from,” is here equivalent to prope starent
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
*****
-Quoad. “ Until.”—Subsidio confisi. “ Confident of being 0*j supported.”
Summs copiis. “ With any very numerous force.” Literally, “ with numerous forces.” Some render summis copiis, “ with all their forces,” but the Greek paraphrast favours the other interpretation, ohtctri iroXXfj dvrdfUl rolg 'Pufwbig cvvifU^av.
 Animum advertit. For animadvertit, which appears in the Q(j common text, Gravius observes (ad Cic. Off. 2, 19) that the copyists have in many places altered this elegant form of expression, substituting for it the latter.
Ripa autem erat, dtc. “ The bank, moreover, was defended by sharp stakes fastened in front of it, while other stakes of the same kind, fixed down beneath the water, were covered by the river.” Lipsius (Poliorcet. 5, dial. 3) thinks we ought to read here plumbo instead of flumine, because Bede, who lived in the eighth century, speaks in his history (1, 11) of certain stakes, still seen in his time in this quarter, which had lead attached to them in order to keep them in their places. Cesar, however, says they were sharpened at the end, which would supersede, of course, the necessity of any lead being employed ; and besides, Bede may easily have been led into error with regard to the particular spot. Stakes kept in their places by means of lead indicate, moreover, a higher degree of civilization than that to which the Britons had thus far attained.
Cum capite solo, dtc. “ Though they were above the water with the head only,” i. e., though their heads only were above the water. Literally, “ though they were out of the water with the head alone.”
Ut supra demonstravimus. Compare chapter 17.—Servabat.
“ Kept watching.” Servabat is here put for observabat. Compare the Greek paraphrase, mftrjfpn. Servare for observare is of frequent occurrence. Compare SU. Ital. 6, 384. Terence, Andr. t.
3, 7. Lucan, 1, 601, dtc.
Ex via. “ From the beaten track.” i. e., public road or highway.—Impeditis. “ Intricate.”
 Magno cum periculo, dtc. “ With great danger to our horse.”
—Hoc metu. “ By the fear of this.”
Relinquebatur. “ It remained.”—Discedi. Supply ab equitibus. “ The cavalry to depart.”—Et hostibus noceretur. “And the enemy were injured.”—Quantum labore, dtc. “ As far as the legionary soldier j could effect this amid fatigue and marching,” i. e.,
•mid the fatigue of a long march.
Digitized by GoogleHOTE» OW THE FIFTH BOOK.
mb
* Continentem Galliam So Lby, 31, 45, “ Continens Attica” and Nepos, Themist. 3, “ Continens terra”
Atque in civitatem mittat, &c. “And to send him into the state, to preside over it and hold the government.” Compare the Greek paraphrase : sal abrbt t% v6\h*s sal a for £p^§vra rtpxttv. Tbo reference is to Mandubratius.
1. Obsides ad numerum, dee. “ Hostages, to the number required, and an abundant supply of corn.*' The student will mark the force of the plural in frumenta.
Ab omni militum, &c. 41 And secured from all violence on the part of the soldiery.”—Cenimagni. Most probably the Cenomani, who had come over from Gaul and settled in Britain. The Greek paraphrase has K vnpavdt.
Oppidum Cassivellauni. Bede {Hist. Artg. 1, 2) calls this town Cassibellaum.
Oppidum autem, dtc. 44 New the Britons call it a town* when,” dec. The native term was Coer. Compare Caesar’s description of a British town with that given by Strabo, 4. p. 209; viXsts Bptrav&v tldlv of Spvfiol, k. t. X.
Locum. 44 The place in question.” One MS. has lucum, which Oudendorp pronounces no inelegant reading.
Ad mare. 44 On the seacoast.” Compare the Greek party- phrase, xapaQaXamta.—Supra. Chspter 13.
Castra navalia. 44 Themaval camp.” This has already been mentioned in the 11th chapter.—Oppugnent. “Storm.” Used here for expugncntt as adoriantur precedes.
In continenti. “ On the continent,” i. e., in Gaul.—Quit vectigalis. “ How much tribute.” Literally, “ what of tribute.”
93 L Refectas. “Repaired.”—His deductis. “ These being launched.” Supply ad mare. Literally, “ being drawn down to the sea.”
Duobus commeatibus. “ By two embarcations.”
Navigationibus. “ Voyages.”—Desideraretur. “ Was missing,” i. e., was lost. The Greek paraphrast has *arairrrr«*09va«, “ was sunk.”
Prioris commeatus. “ Of the previous convoy.”—Locum aperent. 44 Made good the harbour,” i. e., reached the island. More literally, 44 reached the (destined) place.”
Angustius milites collocavit. u Stowed his troop® in a narrower compass than usual.”
Subductis navibus. 44 The ships being drawn on shove ” Supp’y in aridi m.
Digitized by UooQleMOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Page
Frumentum angustius provenerat. “ Grain had Been pro* 98 duced in less quantities than usual,” i. e., the crop had partially failed, or there was a scarcity of grain.
In plures civitates. “ Among a greater number of states,” i. s., than had before been customary.—EsSuos. Some editors suggest Aeduos as a reading, because no mention is elsewhere made of the Essui But Cssar is here speaking of nations near the lower Rhine, whereas the Aedui were at a considerable distance from that river.
Belgio. By Belgium is here meant a part of Gallia Belgica, not the whole. It comprehended the territory of the Bellovaci, Atrebates, and Ambiani. Consult Cellarius, Geog. Antiq. vol. ii., p. 307.
Mederi. “Remedy.”
Millibus passuum centum. There is an error in this, for from 99 the confines of the Eburones to the winter quarters of Crassus the distance was nearly 180 miles. The Greek paraphrast, on the other hand, errs by excess, for he has b SySofjKovra ordSiuv pvptdai irtpitl^tro
Tertium jam kune, &c. The true reading of this passage is very much disputed. The one which we have given rests in part on the editions of Basle, Aldus (1530), Glareanns, &c., and partly on the Greek paraphrase : r<J> Si 0aat\elat airoJJ rptro Zret, of Svapiv- tit a&Todj voXAwv 1% ir6\eu>s ipytmutv rotfnro rod xpdyparot alrlwv ytyevfjplvw, /£ ipfavovs antertirav. Hunc refers to Tasgetius, not to annum.
Quod ad plures pertinebat. “ Because several persons were concerned.” Literally, “because it pertained to more persons than one.”
In hiberna perventum, <&c.	“	That they had reached their
respective quarters, and that a place for wintering in had been for* lifted by each.”
Ad fines regni sui, &c.	“	Had	met	Sabinus	and	Cotta	on
the borders of their kingdom.”
De re communi. “ Relative to their common interests.”— Minut posse “ Could be adjusted ”
Missu Casaris. Equivalent to mittente Casare. “Being despatched for this purpose by C®sar.”
Plurimum ei, &c. “ Acknowledged he was under very great ] (|() obligations to him.”—Stipendio liberatus esset. “ He had teen liberated from tribute,” i. e., freed from the payment of it.
De oppugnatione castrorum. “ As regarded tie attack on our camp.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK
100	8* ^uaiuc «« imperia, dtc. “ And that his authority "vas of
such a nature, that the people at large had no less power over him than he had over them.”
Ex humilitate sua. ‘‘From his own weakness.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, roirov 6i vfJpmv rfjv ipjp ramiv&niTm ivvuftai
&id6*U.
Sed esse Gallus commune consilium. “ But that it was the common design of Gaul,” i. e., that it was a common and preconcerted plan on the part of the whole nation.
Non facile Gallos, dec. “That it was no easy matter for Gauls to give a refusal to Gauls,” i. e., a refusal to join with them.
Quibus quoniam, dec. “ That since he had satisfied them, as far as duty to his country was concerned, so now he had respect to the claims of duty, as regarded the favours bestowed upon him by Cesar,” i. e., as he had discharged his duty to his country, he would now discharge that which he owed to Cesar in return for his numerous kindnesses.—Pietate. The term pietas among the Roman writers has a very extensive meaning, denoting the duty which we owe to our parents, relations, friends, country, and the Deity. The reference in the present passage is to country merely.
Pro hospitio. “ In consideration of the ties of hospitality.” —Conductam Rhenum transisse. “Having been hired for the purpose, had crossed the Rhine.”—Hanc. “ That this band.”
 Ipsorum esse consilium.	“That it was for themselves to consider.” Ipsorum refers to Titurius and Cotta. Compare the explanation of Lemaire: “ Deliberent ergo inter se (scii. Sabinus et Cotta), seu videant Romani, au velint,” dec.
Quod cum faciat, dec. “ That in doing this, he was both consulting for the good of his own state, in its being freed from the burden of winter quarters, and was making a proper return to Caesar for his acts of kindness towards him.”
101 i Ad consilium rem deferunt. “ They lay the matter befoie a
council of war.”—Existit. “ Arises.”
Rem esse testimonio. “That the fact spoke for itself.”— Multis ultro, dec. “ Many wounds having been inflicted upon the latter, without any being received in return.” Compare the explanation of Lemaire: “ nam Romani intulerant hostibus xulnera; ipsi vero non acceperant
Re frumentaria non premi. “ That they were not distressed
for com.’ Compare ti e Greek paraphrase,	v	Mtrts	she
slvat
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK,
Levius aut turpius. “Weaker or more cowardly.”—Auc~ |Q|
tore hoste, &c.	“	To	deliberate	concerning	matters of the utmost
importance when an enemy was the author of the step.” Com* pare the Greek, «ara rfiv rfir roXtpittv yviapnv xepl t&v wdvruv
saBmt. The reference is to the information derived from the enemy, on which their deliberations would be based.
Sero. “ Too late.”—Clamitabat. “ Kept crying out loudly and repeatedly.” The frequentative is here very emphatic.
Aliquid calamitatis. “ Some disaster.”—Brevem consulendi,
&c.	“ That the time for deliberation was short.” — Arbitrari*
“ That he supposed.” Supply se.
Non hostem auctorem, &c.	“	That he did not look to the
enemy as an authority for the step which he recommended, but to the fact itself.”—SpJbesse. “Was near.” Compare the Greek* vXrjalov ftiv ydp & 'Pifrog.
Ardere Galliam, &c.	“	That	Gaul burned with resentment,
at having been reduced, after so many insults had been received by it, under the sway of the Roman people.”
Sine certa re. “ Without accurate information,” i. e., unless on sure grounds.
Si nil sit durius. “ If no greater difficulty came in their way,” i. e., if no attack were made by the Gauls.
Unam salutem. “Their only safety.” Compare Viigfl,
AEn. 2, 354, “ Una salus victis.”
Prasens. “Immediate.”—Longinqua obsidione. “Resulting from a protracted siege.” Longinquus is here put for diuturnus. Compare Broukhus. ad Propert. 1, 6, 27.
Primisque ordinibus. “ And the principal centurions,” i. e., | Q*J the centurions of the first ranks. Consult Archeological Index,
and compare note 11, page 46.
Vincite. “ Prevail,” i. e., carry your point.—Neque is sum qui, <kc. “ For I am not the man among you to be very greatly alarmed at the danger of death.”
Hi sapient, &c.	“	These	will	discover	which of us is right,
and, in case any disaster occur, will demand satisfaction, Cotta, from you,” i. e., will call you to account for it. Hi refers to the Roman soldiers standing without, but near enough to hear what was said. Compare the Greek paraphrase: dbni il fpovotm»* arptmartu,
s.	r. k.
Qui. “ Since they.”—Perendino die. “ On the third day nence.” Perendie, from which the adjective perendinus comes, in
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
] 02 demed> according to the grammarians, from peremptus and dies*
and is the same as perempta die, the intervening day being meant
by die.
Rejecti et relegati, &c.	“ As if forced away and banished by
you to a distance from their countrymen.” By cateris are meant the Romans in the other winter quarters, while by rejecti and relegati is figuratively expressed the forced separation, by the command of their officers, of the troops of Cotta from those in the neighbour* ing provinces. Compare the Greek: d>A’ ob *rdv SXXuv, &$ av «* Af fa* jia^atpq, J) Xifify, ala^pdg iieoBavovot.
Consurgitur ex concilio, &c. “ The members rise from the council, they embrace and beseech both Cotta and Sabinus.”
Rem. “ Affairs.”—Facile esse rem. “ That it was an easy matter.”—Res disputatione perducitur. “The debate is protracted.”
Dat manus. “ Yields.” Literally, “ gives his hands.” A figurative expression, borrowed from the form of making a surrender, by stretching forth, or holding up, hands.
 Pronunciatur, &c.	“ Orders are issued for the troops to march at daybreak.” Literally, “ it is announced that they wil depart,” &c.
Consumitur vigiliis, &c. “Is spent without sleep, each soldier looking about among his effects, to see what he might be able to carry with him, what part of his winter stores he would be compelled to leave behind.” The expression ex instrumento hibernorum is rendered by the Greek paraphrast Ik tZv
Omnia excogitantur, &c. “Every reason is suggested, to show why they could not stay without danger, and why that da lger would be now increased by the languor of the soldiers, and their want of sleep.” The meaning of this passage has given riso to much controversy. Its import appears to us to be as follows: The Roman soldiers felt the disgrace of the step which they were aliout to take, and kept suggesting, therefore, in conversation with one another, various plausible arguments, to show that it was the only plan they could safely pursue in the present crisis
IS.	Posteaquam ex nocturno fremitu, &c.	“	After	they got in
timation of their intended departure, by the noise which prevailed during the night, and their not retiring to repose.”
A millibus, &c. “At the distance of about two mile».” An idiom analogous to our own mods of expression. “ about two miles off.”
Digitized by GoogleHOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK
rage.
Convallem. The term convallis, though generally rendered | (J2 " valley,” yet conveys in strictness the idea of a long and extended one. Compare Festus> b. v.—Demisisset se. “ Had descend ed.”
Ut qui nihil ante, &c.	“ Since he had not at all foreseen
the danger, was thrown into the greatest alarm, ran up and down,”
&c —Atque ut. “ And in such a way that.” Supply it a before ut.
Qui in ipso negotio, dec. “ Who are compelled to deliber- ] Qj ate in the very moment of action,” i. e., when they ought to act.
Auctor. “ An adviser.”—In appellandis. “ In addressing.”
Minus facile per se, &c.	“ They could less easily perform
everything themselves,” i. e., every part of their duty could not be readily performed by them in person; or, they could not easily visit every part. The reference is to Titurius and Cotta.
Jusserunt protiunciare. “They ordered the officers to an nounce to their men.” Supply duces before pronunciare. We have here adopted the reading of the earliest MSS. The common text has pronunciari.
Incommode accidit. “ It turned out untowardly on the present occasion,” i. e., proved unfortunate.
Spem minuit. This was produced by the abandonment of their baggage, since the soldiers easily perceived from this step that affairs were considered to be at the last extremity.—Quod videbatur “ Because it was apparent.”
Vulgo. 11 Everywhere.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, wdvrodtv.—Abripere. “ Tear away.” A much more forcible reading than arripere.
Barbaris consilium non defuit. “ Judgment was not wanting to the barbarians,” i. e., the barbarians were not deficient in judgment on this occasion.
Pronunciare jusserunt. “ Ordered the different chieftains to •nnounce,” i. e., to give orders to their respective followers.
Illorum. Referring to the Gauls.
Erant el virtute, &c.	“	Our men, by both their value and
numbers, were a match for the enemy in fighting.” The meaning is, not that the numbers of the Romans were equal to those of the Gauls, but that the former had troops enough, considering their bravery and discipline, to keep the latter m check.
Procurreret. “ Made a charge,” i. e., rushed forth from the orb.
Cedant. “ To give way before them.”—Levitate armorum,
i
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
naked flanks.”
104 i Locum tenere, “ To retain their place in the orb,” and not
sally forth.—Virtuti locus. “ Room for displaying valour.”— Nec conferti vitare poterant. “ Nor could they, being crowded together into a small compass, avoid,” dec.
Tot incommodis conflictati. “ Although harassed by so many disadvantages.” More freely, “ although having to struggle with so many,” dec.
Ad horam octavam. This would answer to two o’clock in the afternoon; the first hour, according to the Roman computation, being from six to seven in the morning, or, more strictly, from sunrise to the beginning of the second hour.
Primum pilum duxerat. “ Had been chief centurion.” Consult Archaeological Index, and compare note 11, page 46.
6. Ejusdem ordinis. “ Of the same rank,” i. e., a primipilus, or centurion of the first rank.—Subvenit. “ Is striving to aid.”
In adversum os. “ Full in the mouth.” Compare B. C. 3 99, “ Gladio in os adversum conjecto.”
Ille. Referring to Ambiorix.—Ipsi vero, dec. “That no harm, however, should be done to himself,” i. e., he himself should be uninjured, whatever might be determined upon in relation to the lives of the soldiers.
IUe. Referring to Titurius.— Cum Cotta saucio, dec. “ Communicates the answer of Ambiorix to the wounded Cotta, requesting him, if the step appear to him a proper one, to leave the battle,” dec.
Atque in eo constitit. “ And persisted in this resolve,” i. e.v of not going to Ambiorix.
In pr<zsentia. “ At the time.” In the Greek paraphrase, tdr*.—Imperatum facit. “ Does what is commanded.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
Longiorque consulta, tfcc. “And a discourse longer than ]Q4 ordinary is designedly begun by Ambiorix,” i. e., and the conference is designedly protracted by Ambiorix.
Victoriam conclamant. “ Shout out4 Victory.’ ”—Ululatum.
“ A yell.”—Cotta interficitur. Suetonius (Vit. Cos. c. 26) says that this disaster took place in the country of the Germans, “ in Germanorum finibus." The mistake arose from the Eburones being near neighbours to the Germans.
Illi. Referring to those who had retreated to the camp.— JQ/j Ad unum. 44 To a man.”—Incertis itineribus. 44 By uncertain routes,” L e., wandering at hazard.
Sublatus. “ Being elated.”
Re demonstrata. 44 The whole affair being laid before them,v
e., having acquainted them with his success, and having explained to them the desigu which he had in view.
Nihil esse negotii. 44 That it was an easy matter.”—Se profitetur. “ He offers himself.”
Huic. 44 To this officer.” Referring to Cicero. Hotomann and Davies give Ate, on conjecture, which agrees with the hrcfiOa of die paraphrase, but some good MSS. sanction huic, which is certainly the more spirited reading.
6. Lignationis munitionisque causa. “ To procure wood, and materials for the fortifications,” i. e., stakes for the ramparts, dec.
Sustentatur. 44 They hold out.” Supply a nostris.
Magnis propositis praemiis, dec. “Great rewards being 106 offered to the messengers, if they should convey them to their destination.” Literally, “ if they should carry them through,” i. c.,
in safety through the intervening dangers.
Turres admodum, dec. “ One hundred and twenty towers in all.” More literally, “ up to a hundred and twenty towers.” Hotomann thinks this number incredible, and it certainly appears a very large one if we take the term turris in its literal sense. Perhaps, however, nothing more is meant than a species of bastion, of which 120 might very easily have been raised during the period specified in the text.
Praeustae sudes. '* Stakes burnt at the end.” These were used in defending the rampart—Muralium pilorum. 44 Of mural avelins.” These were thrown from the walls against those who were endeavouring to scale them. They were larger and heavier than those used in the field. Liparas is silent respecting them.
Turres contabulantur. 44 Towers of several stories are raised.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
This language would seem to sanction the conjecture given under
note 2.—Pinna loricaque, &c.	“	Battlements	and parapets are
constructed of interwoven hurdles.**
Cum tenuissima, dec. “ Although he was in a very feeble state of health.”
Ut vitro militum concursu, dec. “ So that he was compelled at length, as their spontaneous act, by the flocking together and the entreaties of the soldiers, to show himself some indulgence.”
Qui aliquem sermoms aditum, &c.	“	Who had any intimacy
and grounds of friendship with Cicero.” By sermonis aditum habebant is meant, literally, the having been accustomed to have interviews from time to time with the Roman officer.
Ambiorigem ostentant, dec. “In order to gain credit for what they said, they inform him with a boastful air of the arrival of Ambiorix.” Compare the explanation of Morus : 44 Ambiorigem adesse jactabundi dicunt.” They thought that Cicero would be • lieve what they asserted, when he saw that so humble a state as the Eburones had actually commenced hostilities against the Roman power, and that Ambiorix himself was in arms against Caesar, from whom he had heretofore received so many favours.
Eos. Referring to Cicero and the forces under him.—His. Alluding to the Romans in other winter quarters.
Hoc esse in animo. 41 Were so favourably disposed.” Had such a regard.—Hanc inveterascere consuetudinem. ‘‘That this custom should grow into a precedent,” i. e., should gather strength by long continuance.
Ulis. The Romans.—Per se. “ As far as depended upon them.”
Cicero ad hac, &c. This officer had already been apprized of the defeat and death of Sabinus by one of the fugitives.
Adjutore. “ As an intercessor,” or advocate. The Greek paraphrase gives avvfpyo, “ a co-operator.”
Pro ejus justitia. “ Through his wonted clemency.” Justitia loses here a portion of its strict meaning, and denotes, not so much the desire to render to every one his due, as clemency or compassion. Compare Terence, Heaut., 1, 1, 33, “ Mea stultitia in justitia tua sit aliquod preesidii.”
J07 i Vallo pedum undecim, 6lc. “ With a rampart eleven feet
high, and a ditch fifteen feet wide.” Some commentators suppose that the ditch was also fifteen feet deep, but this is unnetessary.NOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
ragv.
The Greek paraphrase, however, translates merely with reference 107 to depth : sal rttypp vevrtKalitKa rd 0dBog.
Hcec. Referring to their knowledge of fortification.—Consuetudine. 44 By the experience.”—Cognoverant. “ They had learned.”
Sed nulla ferramentorum copia. 44 But having no supply of iron tools.” The ablative absolute. Supply existente.—Ad hunt usum. “ For this purpose.’*
Sagulisque. 14 And short cloaks.” The term sagum (of which sagulum is a diminutive) is said to be of Gallic origin. Its shape was square, and hence Isidorus (Orig. c. 24) remarks, M Sagum Gallicum nomen est: dictum autem sagum quadrum, eo quod apud eos primum quadratum vel quadruplex erat.” It was fastened by a clasp around the neck. The old French word sate points to the Celtic root. The Tartan plaid of modem times may be traced to the same costume. Consult Adelung, Gloss, vol. vi., p. 26.
Terram exhaurire. 44 To remove the earth.” A very poetical form of expression for so plain a writer as Cesar. The Greek paraphrast imitates it very neatly by l£arr\elv.
MiUium decern. Supply passuum. The MSS. and editions vary here, many having millium passuum XV. (i. e., quindecim).
We have adopted the smallest number, although even this appears incredible.
Ad altitudinem valli. “ Equalling the height of the rampart.” Literally, 44 to the height.”—Falces. “ Grappling hooks.” These were the falces murales, or what the Greeks called Sopvlptwava.
The hooks were bent into the shape of a pruning hook, and were fastened to long poles. They were employed for tearing down walls.
8 .Testudinesque. “And mantlets.” These were different from the testudos hitherto described in the notes to the previous books.
They were a kind of mantlet or shed, very similar to the vmece, which were moved up to the ramparts oy means of wheels, and un • dor which the assailants worked the batteaing-ram, or undermined the walls.
Ferventes fusili, &c.	“ Red hot balls of cast clay.’* As re
gards the epithet fusilis here applied to argilla, compare the remark of Fjrcellini, 44 qualis est, ex qua statuce fictiles fiunt.”
Fervefacta jacula. 44 Fiery javelins,” i. e., javelins, or darts, with ignited combustibles attached to the head.—In casas qute, &c.
Against the huts, which were covered with thatch after the Gailie 112
9 GoogleMOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
fashion." By casce, here are meant the winter huts of the soldiers. The Antonine column offers representations of similai
ones.
Distulerunt. “ Spread the flames."
Agere. “ To advance." Compare, as regards the testudo nes, what has been remarked under note 8.
Demigrandi. “ Of retiring from the fight." Equivalent to
loco cedendi. Compare the Greek paraphrase,	fvyfis Iptf«*-
ffVTQ.—Respiceret. “ Looked behind him," i. e , at his effects falling a prey to the' flames. Compare the language of Celsus : “ Cum fortuna eorum incendio omnes absumerentur, nunquam aliquis ad illas oculum reflecteret.
Hunc habuit exitum. “ It had this issue," i. e., was attended with this good consequence.
Ut se sub ipso vallo, &c. “As they had crowded themselves together beneath the very rampart, and those farthest off gave no means of retreat to the foremost," i. e., prevented the foremost from retreating.
Et quodam loco, dec. “ And a tower of the enemy’s having been moved up in one quarter to our rampart, and touching it." The reference is to a moveable tower, of course.
Deturbati. “ The enemy were dislodged.”—Turrisque succensa est. “ And the tower was set fire to from below."
1* Qwi jam primis, dtc. “Who were now approaching the
first ranks," i. e., were rising fast to the rank of primipilus, or
chief centurion.
De loco. “ For precedence."—Summis simultatibus. “ With the greatest secret enmity."
Spectas. “ Do you look for.” Equivalent to circumspicis oi quarts. The common text has exspectas.—Hic, kic dies. We have adopted the reading of Oberlin, as more spirited than the common lection, hie dies, hie dies. Compare Sallust, Cat. 20r “ En ilia, illa libertas."
Quaque pars, dec. “ And where appeared to be the thickest part of the enemy."—Omnium veritus existimationem. “ Having feared the opinion of all," i. e., anxious to preserve his reputation among all.
Procurrentem. “ Running forward to engage him.”—Exani mato. “ Deprived of life.”
Verutum. “ A javelin.” By verutum is meant a light, slender javelin, shaped somewhat like a spit, or else as taporing as a
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
•pit.—Hie cams. “This accident.”—Impeditum. “Thus em- |Qg D&iT&saed.”
Hunc. Referring to Yarenus.—Illum veruto, dec. “ They suppose that the other was transfixed by the javelin.”
In locum dejectus, dec. “ He stumbled and fell into a hoi- ow.”
In contentione, dec. “ In this honourable striving and con test.” Contentione refers to the spirit of emulation by which they were both actuated, certamine to their collision with the foe.
Utrumque versavit. “ Directed alternately the movements of each.” Compare the explanation of Morus : “ Modo hac, modo illa sorte, per vices, uti voluit.”—Ut alter alteri, &c. “That the one rival brought assistance and security to the other,” i. e., the one rival assisted and protected the other.
Gravior atque asperior. “ More severe and difficult to endure.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, fiapvrtpa re salt xaXtmripa rots 'Pvjiatoif.
Res ad paucitatem, dec. “ Matters had come to a small lumber of defenders.”
Unus Nervius. “A certain Nervian.” Unas is here put 109 for quidam. Compare the Greek paraphrase, ns Ncpotffef, and B.
G. 2, 25, B. C. 2, 27.
Suamque in fidem prostiterat. “ And had given him proofs of his attachment.”—Servo. “ A slave of his.” Supply suo.
Periculis. “The imminent danger.” What grammarians call the plural of excellence.
Hora undecima. Corresponding to our five o’clock in the afternoon.
Legionem. Caesar had placed three legions in Belgium, the one here referred to under the command of Crassus, and two others, one under Lucius Munatius Plancus, and the other under Caius Trebonius. Compare chapter 24.
Qua sibi iter faciendum sciebat. “ Where he knew he would have to pass.”—Reipublico commodo. “With advantage to the stato,” i. e., to what the public interests required.
Hora tertia. “ Nine o’clock in the morning.”
Legionem. “A legion.” Not the one which Crassus had Drought, but one which C cesar had with him probably at the time.
Literas publicas. “ The public documents.”—Quod eo, dec. u Which he had brought thither for the sake of enduring the winter,”
e., which he had stored there for the winter supply.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
np.
10. Rem gestam, <fcc. 44 He writes him a full account of what
had taken place among the Eburones.”—Peditatus equitatusqus
copias. A fuller form of expiession than what other writers employ. Compare B. G. 6, 6, “ Magnis coactis peditatus equitatus- que copiis
1* Consilio ejus probato. 44 His conduct being approved of.’’—
Etsi, opinione trium, &c.	44	Although,	being	disappointed	ii.	his
expectation of three legions, he had been reduced to two.” Literally, “ had returned to two.”— Unum communis salutis, &c. 44 The only means of subserving the common safety.”
Grads conscriptam Uteris. 44 Written throughout in Greek characters,” i. e., Latin words in Greek characters. Polyaenus (8, 23, 6) alludes to this circumstance.
Si adire non possit, monet. 44 He cautions the messenger, if he cannot gain access to the camp.” —rid amentum deligata. 44 Fastened to the strap.” By amentum is meant the strap used for hurling the javelin. Compare Festus: 44 Amenta, quibus ut emitti possint, vinduntur jacula.” The strap appears to have been fastened to the middle of the spear.
Casu» Dio Cassius (40,9) says, that this was done purposely by the messenger, but the account of Caesar is, of course, to bo preferred.
Rle perlectam, &c.	44	He	read	it over, and then recited it
aloud in an assembly of the soldiers.” The student will mark tho distinctio^ between lego, 44 to read to one’s self,” and redto, 44 to read aloud,” in order that others may hear.	'
Fumi incendiorum. It was the constant custom of Caesar to bum the buildings of an enemy.—Expulit. 44 Dispelled.”
Armatorum. 44 Men in arms.” Put for militum. Compare Livy, 1, 29, 44 Cursus armatorum and Nepos, Dion. 9, 44 Navem armatis ornat.”
Data facultate. 44 An opportunity being thus afforded,” i. c.,
by the departure of the enemy.— Gallum repetit. 44 Begs tho Gaul again.”—Qui literas, &c.	44	To carry back an answer to
Caesar.”
Ccesar. The position of this word between quibus literis and allatis, is intended to indicate to whom the letter wa9 brought, and is regarded as a great elegance. Compare Hunter, ad Liv. 1, 7, p. 302, and Crombie, Gymnas, vol. ii., p. 389.
Trans vallem magnam. Some editors object to the presence of magnam in the text, and it does not, in reality, appear to be
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
very correct. The Greek paraphrase, however, has p*y£kts ] JQ fapdyyos- Caesar refers to a large valley, traversed by a stream, and on the opposite slope of which, across the stream, the army of the enemy was stationed.
Turn. “For the present, therefore.” We have adopted here the meaning recommended by Flade (Obs. 1), who makes turn equivalent in this passage to “/iir die Gegenioari,” or “/tir den Zeitpunkt.” With this the Greek paraphrase agrees, rtn p*v olr. Morus thinks the connexion obscure, and that Caesar ought to have written ergo tum quidem. This would have been too languid and * spiritless.
Tamen angustiis, &c. “Yet he contracts it as much as J JJ he can by making the streets between the tents narrow.” By
trice are here meant the streets or lanes separating the tents of the different divisions of troops from each other. Of these avenues there were generally five running in the length of the camp, that is, from *he porta preetoria to the porta decumana, and three across. Con* suit Archaeological Index, s. v. Castra,
Ut in summam contcmtionem, &c. This stratagem is mentioned by Frontinus, 3, 17, 6. Compare Stewecchius and Ouden- dorp, ad loc.—Quo commodissimo itinere, “ By what most convenient route.”
Citra vallem. His object was to entice them across the stream ; or, if he could not effect this, to cross the stream himself at that point where he might do it with least danger.
Portasque obstrui. “ And the gates blocked up.” The mode
of doing this is explained in the next chapter. It was meant, of course, as a feint.—Atque in his administrandis, &c.	“ And he
directs them, in executing these orders, to run to and fro as much as possible, and act with the greatest degree of feigned alarm.”
Etiam de vallo. In order to give rise still more strongly to an appearance of alarm on their part.
Ac sic nostros contemseruntt &c.	“	And to such a degree
did they carry their contempt for our men, that the gate, being apparently blocked up, though, in fact, only by a single row of sods ”
—Ea. “ That way,” i. e., by the gates. Used adverbially.
Manu. The reference, of course, is to suitable instruments wielded by the hand. Compare the Greek paraphrase, rd Ipvpa rff
\tipi vtpirijurtiv.
Neque etiamt &c.	“	And	because	he saw, that their position
was abandoned by the enemy wifi no small loss on their part.”
Digitized by CjOOQleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
rap.
11] The enemy lost great numbers amid the marshes and forests, on
abandoning the position which they had previously occupied, and Cssar was afraid of encountering a similar loss, in case he pursued them too far. The reading and interpretation of this passage have been very much disputed. We have followed in both the authority of Oberimus.
1 Producta legione. “ The legion being drawn out from the
camp.”—Non decimum quemque, dec. “ That every tenth man
was not left unwounded,’* i. e., that less than every tenth man, dec.
Pro ejus merito. “As he deserved,” i. e., in handsome
terms. Literally, “ according to his merit.”—Appellat.	“ He
addresses by name,” i. e., he calls unto him and compliments bv name. Compare the Greek paraphrase, brofiatrr] rapt/edXtwir.
Rem gestam proponit. “ He informs them of what had been done,” i. e., of what had happened to Cotta and Sabinus.
Quod. “ Inasmuch as.”—Hoc. “ On this account.”
Expiato incommodo. “ The disaster having been remedied.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, toCtov ixavop&t^dtvrof.—Latatio. A word not occurring elsewhere in any classical author, though sanctioned here by good MSS.
Eo. “To the latter place,” i. e., the winter quarters ot Cicero.—Horam nonam. “ Three o’clock in the afternoon.—Significatio. “ An intimation.”
Trinis hibernis. “ In three different quarters.” Compara the Greek paraphrase, ivi rpta \updbia.
Perlato. “ Being brought unto them,” i. e., being circulated among them.—Consultabant. “Were consulting.” The use of the imperfect in this and the succeeding clauses is very graphic.
Quin acciperet. “ Or without his receiving.”
1 Armorica. Corresponding to the modem Bretagne. The
name Armorica is said to be derived from or, “ upon,” and moir,
“ the sea,” and refers to a country lying along the ocean. Consult Geographical Index.
Tantum apud homines, dec. “ So powerful an influence did it exercise among barbarous men, that some were found,” dec., i. e., s ich was the force of example among a savage people.
Pracipuo honore habuit. “ Treated with peculiar honour,” i.
e., on whom he had always bestowed distinguished marks of honour. —-Alteros.	“The former”—Alteros.	“The latter.”—Officiis.
“ Services,” i. e., good offices.
Idque adeo. dec. “ And I do not know indeed whether this
Digitized by L.ooQleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
rago.
«to be wondered at.” A remarkable deviation from Caesar’s usual 113 mode of speaking in the third person. He alludes t^ the sudden change of sentiment on the part of the Gauls.
Quod, qui, &c.	“	Because they, who were accustomed to be
ranked before all nations in martial valour, had lost so much of that reputation, as to have endured the command of the Roman people.”
The reference in qui virtute belli, &c., is to the Gauls in general.
The expression a Populo Romano imperia is the same iu effect as Populi Romani imperia. So “ legiones a Deiotaro,” B. Alex. 3 ; and “ literce a Casare,” B. C. 1, 1.
Hac spe lapsus. 44 Disappointed in this hope.” Literally, ] ] 4 44 having fallen from this hope.”—Exercere. The common text
has exigere a finitimis. But exercere is sanctioned by the best MSS., and also by the term dost» employed in the Greek paraphrase.
Ultro ad se veniri. 44 That men were coming in unto him of their own accord.”—Conscientia facinoris. The Senones on account of the expulsion of their king Cavarinus (chap. 64), the Carnutes on account of the assassination of Tasgetius (chap. 25).
Armatum concilium. Tacitus refers to the same custom as existing among the Germans. (M. G. 11.) Compare, as regards the Gallic custom, the remark of Stobaeus (1. 13), Kt\rol oiStipoQo- oovi'Tis r& card x6\i> wdvra irpdrrovat; and Livy (21, 20), 44 In his nova terribilisque species visa est, quod armati (ita mos gentis erat)
>n concilium venerunt.” The early Franks only quitted their arma when going to church. Consult the Capitularies of Charlemagne.
1. 7, p. 202.
Omnibus cruciatibus y &c.	44 Is subjected to, and put to
death by, the cruellest tortures.” More literally, 44 by every species of torture.”
Alterius principem factionis. 44 The leader of the opposite
party.”—Supra demonstravimus.	Consult chapter 3.—Casaris
secutum fidem. 44 Had put himself under the protection of Cesar ”
Hue. 44 To them.” In the Greek paraphrase irpfr ahrott.
 Sub castris ejus. 44 Close to his camp.”—Cognosceret. 44 He might reconnoitre.”
Timorisque opinionem. Compare chapter 49, where Cesar J J 5 had recourse to the same stratagem against the Nervii.
Intromissis. 44 Being received within” the Roman works.— Nulla ratione. 44 In no way.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE FIFTH BOOK.
115	3* Magna cum contumelia verborum. “ Iu very insulting lan
guage.”
Dispersi ac dissipati. “ In a scattered and disorderly man* nar.”
Praecipit atque interdicit, dec. “ He commands them, that when the enemy should be terrified and put to flight (which he foresaw would happen, as it did), they all aim at Indutiomarus alone. and he forbids any one wounding a man before he sees that chieftain slain.” We have separated prcecipit and interdicit in translating, in order to convey Csesar’s meaning more clearly.
Mora reliquorum, &c.	"	Having	gained	time	by	the	delay
occasioned in pursuing the rest.”
 Hominis. Referring to Labienus.—Fluminis.	The river Mosa is meant, which separated the territory of the Re mi from that of the Treveri. Compare Cluverius, 2, 14.
Caputque ejus. Florus (3,10), by an error of memory, makes Dolabella, not Labienus, the Roman commander on this occasion.
Digitized by GoogleBOOK VL
f. Per Marcum Silanum, &c. Persons so appointed to ievy JJ7 i^ces were called conquisitores, from their seeking after those vno endeavoured to avoid military duty. Sometimes senators, and, as in the present instance, legsti were appointed to this duty. Compare Lipsius, Mil. Rom. 1, dial. 9, “ Vides honestiores quos dam, atque e senatu conquisitores : imo ipsos legatos.”
Dilectum habere. “ To hold a levy,” i. e., to raise forces.
The common text has delectum, but dilectum is the more accurate form. Compare Gotkofredt ad Rest. s. v. (Lindemann, Carp. Gramm. Lot. vol. ii., p. 405.)
Proconsule. Pompey had been consul the year previous, and was now proconsul, having had the province of Spain assigned him for the space of five years.
Quoniam ipse ad urbem, &c.	“	Since	he himself (i. e., Pom-
pey) was remaining near the city with military command, on account of the affairs of the republic, that he would order the troops which he (Pompey) had raised from Cisalpine Gaul, and which had taken the oath of fidelity to the consul, to repair to their standards and come to him (Caesar).” Pompey, as has already been remarked in the previous note, had decreed unto him, while still in his consulship, the province of Spain, with proconsular powers, for tho space of five years to come, and was allowed permission to levy as many troops as, and from whatever quarter, he pleased. (Dio Cass.
39, 33.) He levied, therefore, a part of his forces in Cisalpine Gaul, whe tooK the military oath to him as consul. When he was preparing, however, to set out for his province, he was opposed by certain of the tribunes of the commons, and the result was that Afranius and Petreius, his lieutenants, were sent into Spain, whil9 Pompey himself was compelled to remain in Italy. Being invested with military command (cum imperio), he could not by law enter he city, but was forced to stay in its vicinity, or, in other words,
K k
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
without the walU (ad urban). To avoid, however, the appearance of compulsory detention, Pompey pretended, that he remained for the purpose of superintending the supplies of corn for the capital, which Caesar here calls “ rcipublxca causa” (Compare Die Cassius, 39, 39.) This duty had been assigned to Pompey, two year» previous, by a law of which Cicero was the proposer. (Cic. pro Dom. c. 4, seq.—Dio Cass. 1. c ) Now, while Pompey was thus remaining near the city, Caesar requested him to send into Gaul the troops which the former had levied in Gallia Cisalpina, or Northern Italy. Pompey assented to the request, and the forces in question, amounting to one legion, were accordingly sent. It is worthy ol remark, that this same legion was very artfully obtained back by Pompey, near the commencement of the contest between him and Cesar; a step which gave great offence to the latter (Hirtius, B. G. 8, 54.—Appian, B. C. p. 446, ed. Steph.), and which, according to Plutarch (Vit. Cos. c. 25), wTas one of the immediate causes of the Outbreaking of the civil conflict.
Sacramento. Consult Archaeological Index. — Rogamsset. The subjunctive here, and also in remaneret which precedes, refers to what C®sar had heard from others. The verb rogare has in this clause its secondary or derivative meaning. It signifies, properly, “to ask;” then “to elect to any office,” the people being asked their opinion relative to the merits of the candidate, and in the present instance it means “ to select” or “ choose soldiers in a levy,” they being interrogated as to their willingness to bind themselves by the military oath and act the part of good soldiers. Hence wo have in Festus (p. 264, ed. Lind.), “ Sacramento interrogari.”
Magni interesse, &c.	“ Thinking it of great importance even
for the time to come, as regarded the opinions which might bo formed by the Gauls, that the resources of Italy should appear so great,” &c., i. e., thinking it of great importance towards forming th* future opinions of the Gauls.
Sarciri. “Be repaired.” Sarcire properly means “to repair a garment, or article of clothing generally.” Here, however, it is employed in a sense which is very common among legal writers, viz., “ to repair damage,” “ to make whole.” Thus wo have m the laws of the twelve tables, “ Si quadrupes pauperiem faxit, dominus sarcito.” On which Festus remarks: “ Sarcito, in XII., Ser. Sulpicius ait significare damnum solvito, praestato.”
Majoribus adaugeri copiis. “ Be more than compensated by •a increase of forces,” i. e., by a more powerful army than before
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
B. Quod cum Pompeius, &c.	“	Pompey	having granted this JJ7
to both the interests of the republic and the claims of private friendship,” i. e., both through regard for the republic and private friendship. Literally* “ to both the republic and friendship.
10 Per suos. “ By his officers,” i. e., the legati already men tinned.—Et constitutis et adductis. “Being both formed and brought to him.”
Populi Romani disciplina. Compare the spirited eulogiura of Valerius Maximus on the discipline of the Roman armies (2, 8);
“ Disciplina militaris, acriter retenta, principatum Italia Romano imperio peperit; multarum urbium, magnorum regum, et validissimarum gentium regimen largita est; fauces Pontici sinus patefecit; Alpium Taurique montis convulsa claustra tradidit, ortumque t parvula Romuli casa, totius terrarum orbis fecit columen.”
Ut docuimus. Consult chapter 58, book 5.—Non desistunt. Consult chapter 55, book 5.
Jurejurando inter se, &c. “The two parties bind themselves to one another by an oath, and secure the payment of the money by means of hostages,” i. e., the Treviri give hostages to the Germans as a security for the money. The verb caveo is used here in its legal sense. Compare the explanation of Forcellini : “ Cavere re aliqua est re aliqua, veluti pignore, securum facere.” So car vere ab aliquo is “ to obtain security from one.”
Cisrhenanis omnibus Germanis. The reference is to that part of the Belgae who dwelt near the Rhine, namely, the Condrusi, Eburones, Ceraesi, and Paemani. Compare Davies, ad he.
Ad imperatum. “To perform what had been commanded them.” Equivalent to, “ ad id prastandum quod imperatum erat.”
Nondum hieme confecta. “ Winter being not yet ended,” ] J (J
e., before the end of winter.
Uti instituerat. “ As he had been accustomed to do.” He was accustomed to hold a council of the states of Gaul every year. Compare chapter 44.
Omnia. “Everything else.”—Lutetiam Parisiorum. The modern Paris.—Hi. Referring to the Parisii.
Sed ab hoc consilio, &c.	“ But were supposed not to be con
cerned in this plot.” More literally, “ to have been away from this design.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, rifc r&v Xsvdvvy 0ovXr}g ob HSraoytXv.
Hac rc, &c.	“	This	adjournment having been announced
from the tribunal.” The suggestus (called also suggestum) was
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
rage.
an elevated place formed of turf, stone, or wood, according to circumstances. From this speeches were delivered, and the presiding
officer of a public assembly pronounced his opinion or judgment. Representations of it frequently occur upon Roman coins.
Conantibus, dec. “ To them attempting to do so, before it could be accomplished, word is brought,” &c.—Deprecandi. “ Of excusing their acts.” Compare the explanation of Davies : “ Coe- pta sua excusandi.”
Adeunt per Aeduost &c.	“ They make their application
through the Aedui, under whose protection their state was in former days.” Quorum depends in construction on fide, not on civitas. The Senones had been clients and allies of the Aedui. Compare the explanation of Morus : “ Senones erani clientes et socii Aeduorum ,-” and the language of the Greek paraphrase, T(frro Si Sid rfflp *ESoviu)v, wv U to5 rdXai hw/jKooi %oav, Steirpdj-avro.
Dai veniam. “Grants them pardon.”—Quod cestimim tempus, &c.	“	Because	he	thought,	that the summer season was the
time for prosecuting war, not for legal investigations.” More literally, “ belonged to war pressing on,” or “ at hand.”
Deprecatoribus. “As intercessors.”—Ferunt. “They bear away,” i. e., receive from Caesar.—Peragit. “ Breaks up.” Literally, “finishes.”
Totus et mente, &c.	“ He applies himself with his whole
heart and thoughts.” We have altered, in translating, the order of mente and ammo,-in order to adapt the phraseology more to the English idiom.
Cavarinum. Compare chapter 54, book 5.—Ex hujus ira
cundia. “ From this man’s violent temper,” i. e., his desire of revenge acting upon a disposition naturally irascible.—Ex eo quod meruerat, &c.	“	From	that	hatred on the part of the state, which
he had incurred.” He had become odious to the state, because Caesar had made him king over it.
1 Pro explorato. “ For certain.”—Reliqua ejus consiaa, Ac.
“ He watched his other plans attentively,” i. e., narrowly observed all his movements. Ejus refers to Ambiorix.
Perpetuis paludibus, &c.	“ Protected by one continued ex
tent of marshes and woods.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, aw
*X*°l MpvatS rt sal CXaif vdvToOtv it tpit\o pivot.
Hospitium. “ A friendship founded upon the ties of hospitality.”—Amicitiam	“ An alliance.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK
Illi. Referring to Ambiorix.—Ipsum. Alluding to the 2] name, and put in opposition to auxilia.
In Menapios se abderet. “ Might take refuge among the Menapii,” i. e., “ might go among the Menapii and hide himself there,” as the accusative plainly indicates. In Menapiis se abderet would imply that he had been for some time among the Menapii before he concealed himself.
Congredi. “ To connect himself with,” i. e., to go and unite with. Compare the Greek paraphrase, ovppaxfav vouiadai.
Loci prasidio. “ On the strength of their situation.” More literally, “ on the aid which their situation afforded.”
Adit tripartito. “ Marches against them in three divisions.” Tripartito is equivalent here to per tres partes simul. The Greek paraphrase, in like manner, has rp<xjf-
Hiemabat. Some read hiemaverat; but hiemabat is the true lection, for the winter was not yet over. Oudendorp restored hiemabat to the text from good MSS., and the authority of the Greek paraphrase, which has xeipdfytvn r$ Aa6t/j*q>.
A millibus, dec. Compare chapter 22, book 4, and consult note 13, page 102.
Cum viginti qutnque cohortibus. Five-and-twenty cohorts were the same as two legions and a half, ten cohorts making a legion. CaBsar adopts here the former phraseology, as the cohorts probably belonged to several different legions.
Flumen. Rhellicanus and Manutius make this river to have 12 been the Mosella, but on this point there is no certainty whatever.
Augebatur auxiliorum, &c. Referring to the enemy.—Loquitur. Referring to Labienus.
In dubium non devocaturum. “ Will not involve in danger.” Some read revocaturum, which is altogether incorrect, for he had not before exposed them to risk.
Ut ex magno, &c.	“	Since,	out	of	a	large number of Gallic
cavalry, nature compelled some to favour the Gallic interests,” i. e,, since it was very natural, that, out of so large a number of Gallic horse as were then in the Roman camp, some should be found to favour the interests of their countrymen, and convey to them intel ligence of the Roman movements.
Primisque ordinibus. “ And chief centurions.” Compare chapter 30, book 5.
Quid sui sit consilii proponit. “ Lays before them his real design.”
K k 2
Digitized by GoogleN0TE8 ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
j 20	7. Fugce similem profectionem. Frontinus (2, 6, 20) makes
mention of this stratagem of Labienus.
Speratam prcedam. Ciacconius suggests paratam for speratam, contrary to all the MSS. The Greek paraphrase has correctly, IknsQtioav \elav.
Longum esse. “ That it was too long,” i. e., that it would be folly.
Impeditam. “ Encumbered with baggage.”
Eadem usus, &c. “Practising the same deception as regarded his march,” i. e., keeping up the appearance of a retreat
Facultatem. “The opportunity.”—Impedito atque iniquo loco. “ In an embarrassed and disadvantageous situation.”
Prccstdte. “ Display.”—Adesse eum, &c.	“	Imagine	that
he is present, and sees these things with hia own eyes,” i. e., and is an eyewitness of your actions.
Ad impedimenta dimissis. “ Being detached to guard the baggage.”—Ad latera. “ On the flanks.”
1. Infestis signis ad se venire. “ Coming towards them with
hostile standards,” i. e., marching to attack them.—Impetum
modo. “ Our charge meiely,” i. e., even our charge.
Propinqui Indutiomari. Consult chapter 2. —Cingetorigi. Consult chapter 3 and 56, book 5.
Ex Menapiis. The narrative now goes back to the close of chapter 6.—Quarum erat altera. “ The one of which was.” Some editions have una, which is far inferior.
Ne communi odio, &c.	“	Lest	in	his common hatred of the
Germans.”—Poenas pendant. “ Suffer.”
Cognita causa. “ On an investigation of the case.”
1 Barbaros atque imperitos homines. “ That a barbarous and
ignorant people.” The reference is to the Suevi.
Infinita magnitudine. “ Of prodigious extent.”—Bacentx A part, very probably, of the Hercynian forest.
Ab Suevis. “On the side of the Suevi.”—A't Cheruscis.
“ On the side of the Cherusci.”
Non alienum. “Noway foreign to our purpose.”—Proponere. “ To treat.” More literally, “ to lay before” (the reader an account).
In omnibus pagis, &c.	“	In	all	the	cantons and parts of can*
tons.”—In singulis domibus. “In each family.”
Earumque factionum, &c.	“	And	the heads of these parties
are persons, who, in their opinion, are supposed to possess the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE 8IXTH BOOK.
greatest influence: to whose will and decision the direction of all ] affairs and counsels is referred,” i. e., on whose will and decision all their most important affairs and resolutions depend.
Idque ejus rex causa, dec. “ And thie custom seems to have oeen instituted from early times, for the following reason.”
Ne quis ex plebe, &c. The reason here assigned was ir. like manner the basis of the Roman institution of patrons and clients.
Quisque. 44 Each leader,” i. e., each patron.—Neque, aliter si factant. We have here what grammarians call a syllepsis of number, or change from the singular to the plural. Compare Sonet Min. 4, 10 (vol. ii., p. 365, ed. Bauer).
Hac eadem ratio est, &c.	44 This same principle prevails in
the general administration of all Gaul.” Compare the explanation of Morus : 44 In summa rerum publicarum, sive in administrations et forma universes civitatis Gallica.”
Alterius factionis, &c. 44 The Aedui were at the head of
one party.”—Hi. 44 The latter.” Referring to the Sequani.—Summa auctoritas,	44	The	chief	influence.”
Jacturis. 44 Sacrifices,” i. e., expenses or gifts. Jactura properly denotes what is thrown overboard in a storm in order to save the rest of the cargo. (Compare Cic. Off. 3, 23.) Here, however, it is employed in the sense of pecuniary sacrifices or expenditures, or, in other words, of a present loss, in expectation of future benefit. Compare B. C. 3, 112, and Cic. ad Att. 6, 1. Consult also Gronovius, de Pec. Vet. 4, 4, p. 285.
Tantum potentia antecesserant. 44The Sequani had so far J23 surpassed the latter in power.”—Its. Referring to the Aedui.
Romam ad Senatum, &c. Compare note 13, page 18.—Infecta re. 44 His object being unaccomplished,” i. e., without success.
Commutatione. 44 A change.” This change was brought about by Caesar’s defeat of Ariovistus.—Obsidibus Aeduis redditis.
44 Their hostages being given back to the Aedui.”
Eorum. Referring to the Aedui.—Aggregaverant. 44 Had attached.”—JEquiore imperio. 44 A more equitable government.”
Reliquis rebus eorum, dtc. 44 The rest of their affairs, their
t.fluence, their dignity being augmented.” In order to avoid ambiguity, amplificata is here made to agree with dignitate instead of rebus.
Dimiserant. Used here for amiserant, but more graphic.
7 Quos j uod adaquare, &c. As quos begins the clause, it is to
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
i. e., Aeduoa.
Se Remis, &c.	“	Put	themselves	under the protection of the
Remi.” More literally, “ consigned themselves to clientship under the Remi.”—lUi.	Referring to the Remi.—Collutam.	“Ac
quired.”
Qui aliquo sunt in numero, &c.	“	Who	are	of	any	note	and
are held in any estimation.” Compare the explanation of Lcmaire; “ Digni habiti qui recenseantur et numerenturf quasi scutali hami
Genera. “Classes.” Literally, “kinds,” or “orders.”
Aere alieno. “By debt.” Aes alienum means literally, “ the money of another,” i. e., due or owing to another. The first money coined by the Romans was of brass, and hence the use of as in this sense.
Magnitudine tributorum. “ The weight of taxes.”—ZnVuno “The oppression.” More literally, “the injurious,” or “insolent treatment.”—Sese dicant. “ Give themselves up.”
In hos. “ Over these.”—Qua, dominis, &c.	“ As masters
possess over their slaves.” Equivalent to qua jura sunt dominis, Ac.
14. Alterum est Druidum. “ The one is that of the Druids.” As regards this priesthood, consult Historical Index, s. v. Druides.
16. Illi rebus divinis intersunt. “ The former take part in sacred matters,” i. e., officiate in them. This is explained immediately after. The people are said adesse, “ to be present” at sacrifices ; the Druids interesse, “ to be present and take a part.”
Procurant. “ They have charge of.” Compare Strabo (4, p. 198, Cas.) : tOvov Sc obx Svev ApviSdv.—Religiones interpretantur. “They expound the principles of religion.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, rhv fynotetav Ip/aptf o»<r<.
Disciplina causa. “For instruction.” The Druids were ako a class of public instructed, and taught the doctrines of nat- mal and moral philosophy to he young. Compare Strabo, 4, p. 197 : Apvtiai Si irpbf iff pvaioXoyk?, sal rfiv <piXoc9(p(av ioKcftoi.
Ii. Referring to the Druids.—Eos. Their pupils.
Si cades facta. “ If murder has been committed.” Supply sit.—Proemia poenasque. “The sum to be paid, and the punishment to be endured.”
Digitized by Goo; eNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Puge
Non stetit. “ Has not abided by-” Sacrificii» interdicunt. ] 94 u They interdict from the sacred rites,” i. e., they excommunicato
liim.
Aditum eorum, &c.	“ All shun their company and converse.”
—Ex contagione. “ By their contact,” i. o., by coming in contact with them.
Jus redditur. “ Is justice dispensed.”—Neque honos ullus communicatur. “ Nor do they share any of the honours of the state.”
De principatu. “For the office of presiding Druid.”
ft. Totius Gallia media, dec. This remark must not be taken m a very strict sense. Compare Cellarius, Geogr. Ant. vol. ii., p. 163.
Disciplina. “ This institution.” Referring to the Druidical system.—Reperta. “ To have originated.”
Diligentius eam rem cognoscere. “ To become more accu- lately acquainted with it.”—Illo. “ To that island.”
Militia vacationem, &c. “They enjoy an exemption from military service, and immunities of every kind.”
Excitati. “ Urged on.” Encouraged.—Pramiis. “ Privileges,” or advantages.—In disciplinam conveniunt. “ Embrace this profession.”
Ediscere. “To learn by heart.”—In disciplina. “Under instruction.”
Ea literis mandare. “ To commit these things to writing.”
—Cum. “ Whereas.”—Rationibus. “ Transactions.”
Id instituisse. “ To have established this custom.”—Quod neque in vulgum, dec. “ Because they wish neither the doctrines of their order to be published to the common people, nor those who learn, to rely on books and exercise their memory less.”
In primis hoc volunt persuadere. “ The Druids wish in particular to inculcate this idea,” i. e., it is a favourite doctrine with the Druids.
Non interire animas, dec. “ That the souls of men do not
pfrish but pass, after dissolution, from one body to another.” This is the famous doctrine of the transmigration of souls, or metempsychosis. Compare Strabo (4, p. 196), &<ft6dpnvs rds	My0™*
TaXrfrac. Consult also Lucan, Pharsal. 1, 450 ; Mela, 3,2 ; Amm. Marcell. 15, 9, dec.
1. Disputant. “ They reason.”—Et juventuti transdunt “And ] 25 impart theii reflections to the young.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
12}	2. Cum est usus. “ Whenever there is need.”
Omnes in bello versantur. “ Are all engaged in war/*
Plurimos ambactos clientesque. “ The greatest number of r» (ainers and clients.” Ambactus is a Gallic term, and signifies a retainer, a person attached to a household, who receives a certain oire for his services, &c. Hence in the old glossaries it is explained oy bo$\ot juodurbs, although bsoXoc here comes nearer, in meaning, to the feudal term “ vassal,” than to the Roman word “ servus.” The Latin “ minister” would explain its meaning better than servus. In the Gothic version of St. Paul's epistle to the Romans, we have “ Waldufni ist andbahts goths,” i. e., potestas est ministra dei (13, 3, 4); and again, Sidsows (i- minister) is rendered by andbants. It is easy to see, therefore, that Dacier is quite wrong, when he seeks to make ambactus a word of Latin origin, and to derive it from Ambigere.
Hanc unam gratiam, dec. “ This is the only kind of influence and authority with winch they are acquainted,” Compare, as regards the force of gratiam here, the remark of Morus : “ Gratiam, Benevolentiam, non quam quis aliis ipse gratificando exhibet, sed in qua ipse esi apud alios, quam init ab aliis, et per quam sibi conciliat potestatem.”
Admodum dedita religionibus. “ Exceedingly addicted to superstitious rites and observances,” i. e., is exceedingly superstitious. Religionibus is here equivalent, as Morus remarks, to “ ritibus sacris, iisque superstitiosis.”
Pro victimis homines immolant. This cruel and barbarous custom on the part of the Gauls is alluded to by many ancient writers. Consult Strabo, 4, p. 198, and Diod. Sic. 5, 31. They had a custom, also, of divining from such sacrifices the events of the future, deriving their omens from the palpitations of the limbs and fibres, the flowing of the blood, &c.
Publiceque ejusdem generis, &c. Compare the language of Placidus Lactantius (in Stat. Theb. 10, p. 368), “ Lustrare civi- totem humana hostia Gallicus mos est. Nam aliquis de egentis** mis pelliciebatur pramiis, ut se ad hoc venderet: qui anno toto publicis sumtibus alebatur purioribus cibis, denique certo et solemni die, per totam civitatem ductus, ex urbe extra pomoeria saxis occidebatur a populo”
Context a viminibus. “ Formed of interwoven osiers.” Strabo 1. c.) calls it a colossus of hay, KajaoKVtdaarrtt KoXooordr \6prov.
Supplicia. “ That the immolation.” Literally, “ the pun
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
pm*
ashment,” i. e., by the species of immolation just described, 125 namely, burning. Diodorus Siculus (5, 32) informs us, that they kept their criminals for five years, and then burnt them all together.
Ejus generis. “ Of this class of offenders.” Supply nocentium.—Etiam ad innocentium supplicia. “ Even to the offering up of the innocent.”
Deum maxime, dec. “ They chiefly worship the god Mer cury,” i. e., Mercury is the principal or favourite deity of the Gauls.
By Mercury, Caesar here means a Gallic deity whose attributes in some degree resemble those of Mercury. This deity is thought by some to have been the same with Woden, whence Wodensdach, or icons tag, i. e., Wednesday, or dies Mercurii. Others, however, are in favour of Teutates (compare the Mercurius* Teutates of Livy,
26, 44, according to the old reading), and this name Teutates recalls the Phoenician Theut. Now, as commerce came into Gaul from Phoenicia, it is more than probable that this latter opinion is the correct one.
Hunc ferunt. “ They regard this deity as.” Literally,
“ they report that he is.”— Viarum atque itinerum ducem. “ Their guide in travelling and on journeys.”
Ad qu<zstus pecunia, &c.	“	Exercises	a	very	powerful in
fluence over the acquisition of gain and over traffic.”
AppoUinem. Supply colunt, “ they worship.” According to Ausonius (Prof. 2), the god here styled Apollo was called in the Gallic tongue Belenus. Herodian, however (8, 3), gives the Celtic appellation as Belis, which approximates more closely to the name of the oriental sun-god Baal, to the early Greek form dfHXios (i. e., tiX<of with the Doric a and the digamma), and the old Latin Apello (i. e., A-bell-o or Apollo).
Martem. By Mars is here thought to be meant a Gallic deity named Esus, Hesus, or Heusus. (Lactant, de F. S. 1, 21.
—Lucan, 1, 445.) Others, however, make Hesus to have been the same with Jove. Compare the Hu- Gadam (“ Hu die powerful”) of Welsh tradition.
Jovem. The Gallic name of the deity here meant was Taran, from which Lucan (1, 446) forms Taranis. The root of Tar an appears to be the same with Thor, the German Jupiter. In Gaelic, Tarann or Torann means “ thunder.”—Minervam. We have no Celtic name for the deity here meant.
De his eandem fere, &c. In C&sar’s time the resemblance here spoken of was comparatively slight. At a later day, daring
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
t‘me	Roro411	emperors,	the	religious	systems	®f	Italy
and Greece were ingrafted on the Gallic creed, and the points oi
similarity became, of course, more manifest. The race of the Druids also passed away with the ancient faith.
Minervam, &c. “That Minerva imparted to mankind the first knowledge of manufactures and arts,*’ i. e., first taught the principles of arts and trades. Minerva, in the Greek and Roman creed, was the parent of all the liberal as well as domestic arts.
1* Qw*- superaverint, <fec. “ They sacrifice whatever captureJ
animals may have remained after the conflict.” Supply ex clade
m prcelio. By animalia capta is here meant live booty hi general, under which head captives are also included. Hence Athen®us (4, 51, p. 160) remarks, that it was customary with the Gauls to sacrifice their prisoners taken in battle, rots $eois rot; alxpahirovs.
Neglecta religione. “ Through disregard of religion.”— Posita tollere. “ To remove those things that have been deposited,” i. e., in sacred places.—Ei rei. “ For such an offence as this.”
Ab Dite patre. “ From Dis as their progenitor,” i. e., from Pluto. Who is actually meant here by Dis, is very hard to say. The idea, however, intended to be conveyed would appear to be, that the Gauls were an aboriginal race, and sprung from the earth.
Spatia omnis temporis, &c.	“	They	compute	all	their divis
ions of time, not by the number of days, but by that of nights.” This mode of computation was not confined to the Celtic race. We have traces of it even in Scripture, “ and the evening and the morning were the first day.” The Gauls, according to this account of Caesar’s, would not say, for example, after seven days, but after seven nights. Compare the English forms of expression, “ seven* night” and “fortnight.”
Ut noctem dies subsequatur. The meaning is, that they count ed their days from sunset to sunset, not from sunrise to sunrise.
In reliquis vitee institutis. “ In the other regulations of life.” —Fere. “Chiefly.”—Ut possint. “ So as to be able.”—Palam ad se adire. “ To appear publicly before them.”
Viri, quantas, &c.	“	Whatever	sum	of	money	the	husbands
receive from their wives, under the name of a dowry, so much of their own property, a valuation having been made, do they add to these dowries.”
Conjunctim ratio habetur. “ A joint account is kept.”—Fruc- tusque servantur• “And the interest is laid by.”
GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Vita superarit. “Shall survive the other.”—Pars utriusque, ] 2^
&c.	“ The portion of both, together with the interest of the pro*
vious period,” i. e., the joint sum. with all the profits till then arising from it.
In servilem modum, &c.	“	They	examine the wives by tor
ture, after the manner of slaves,” i. e., just as slaves are treated among us. Among the Romans, citizens gave their evidence upon oath, but could not be put to the rack. Slaves only could be examined by torture.
Si compertum est. “ If any discovery is made,” i. e., if u be discovered that the husband was destroyed by poison, assassina tion, &c.
Pro cultu Gallorum.	44 For the Gallic mode of life,” i. e.,
considering the little progress which they have made in refinement and elegances of life.
Vivis cordi fuisse. “ To have been pleasing to the living.’
The custom here alluded to was common to many of the barbarous nations of antiquity. Articles of clothing, drinking vessels, favourite slaves, horses, &c., were consumed together with the deceased.
Ac paulo supra hanc memoriam. 44 And not long before our own time.”—Justis funeribus confectis. “ After the regular ceremonies had been performed.” Great difference of opinion exists about the reading as well as sense of this passage. One source of difficulty arises from the circumstance of justa being often used by the Latin writers as equivalent to funera, which has made some commentators regard funeribus as a gloss. We have retained, however, the common reading, and have given justis the force of legitimis.
'Commodius. “To greater advantage than others,” i. e. more judiciously, with greater judgment.—Habent legibus sanctum.
4 Have it enacted by law.” Sanctum is contracted for sancitum.
Imperitos. “ Inexperienced in public affairs.” Compare ] 27 the Greek paraphrase, ixttpovs spaypdnav.
Qua visa sunt. “What they think proper.” More literally, what appears proper to be concealed.”—Ex usu. “ Of advantage.”
Per concilium. “ In council.” More literally, 44 while the < ouncil is sitting.”
Germani multum, &c.	44 The Germans, on the other hand,
differ widely from these customs,” i. e., differ widely in custom from all this.
I, h
Digitized by GoogleNOTAS ON TUE SIXTH BOOK.
J 27	®* ^am nttlut Druides habent. Cttsar means merely that the
Druidical system did not extend into Germany, not that the Germans were without priests and priestesses of any kind. Compare Tacitus, Hist. 4, 61, 66.—Id. de Mor. Germ. c. 8.
Neque sacrificiis student. “ Nor do they pay much attention to sacrifices,” i. e., they have sacrifices among them, but do not pay by any means so much attention to them as the Gauls.
Vulcanum. “ Fire.” The Germans worshipped the sun on account of its genial influence ; fire, from its aiding them as a protection against cold, and also in the preparation of their food; and the moon, from its assisting them with its rays during the long Lights.
Acceperunt. Cesar’s statement is contradicted by that of Tacitus (de Mor. Germ. 9), who expressly informs us, that the Germans worshipped Mercury, Hercules, and Mars; and that a part of the Suevi sacrificed to Isis. Cesar might easily have been deceived, as he passed only a few days within the limits of Germany.
In studiis rei militaris. “ In military pursuits.”<~-Ab parvulis, &c. “ From their very infancy they inure themselves to toil and hardship.”
Impuberes. 44 Chaste.”—Maximam inter suos, dec. Compare Tacitus (M. G. 20), “ Sera juvenum venue,” and Pomponius Mela, 3, 3, “ Longissima apud eos pueritia est.11
Cujus rei nulla est occultatio. Compare the explanation of Lemaire: 44 Incognita est apud eos occultatio partium virilium. Non occultant sexum; ideo facile dignoscuntur ii qui commercium aliquod habuerunt cum feminis.”
Aut parvis rhenorum, dec. “ Or small coverings of deer- hides.” By rheno is here meant a covering of the skin of the reindeer. The name is supposed to come from rhen (rane or rein), a species of animal which we term reindeer. Compare Isidorus (19, 23), “ Rhenones sunt velamina humerorum et pectoris usque ad umbilicum.11
Agricultura non student. 44 They do not pay much atten- ion to agriculture.” The expression non studere rei is equivalent to non magnopere operam dare. Cesar does not mean, that the Germans neglected agriculture entirely, but merely that it did not occupy any large share of their attention. Compare note 6.—Consistit. 44 Is spent.”
Agri modum certum, <fcc. 44 Any fixed portion of land, or
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Pagfc
bmits which he can call his own,” i. e., or ground especially ap- J27 propriated to him in ownership.
Gentibus cognationibusque, dec. “ To the tribes and families,” dec. The term gentibus is here equivalent to the Greek fvXais.
Quantum, dec. “As much land as, and where, they see fit.”—Alio. “ To a different quarter.”
Ejus rei, dec. “ They advance many reasons for this practice.”—Assidua consuetudine. “ By long continued custom,” the custom of residing in, and cultivating, the same places.—Studium belli gerendi, dec. “ They may exchange their attention to war for agriculture.”
IS.	Latos fines. “Extensive possessions,” i. eM extensive landed property.
Hhmiliores. “ The weaker.” Equivalent to tenuiores or infirmiores. Compare Seneca (de Ira, 1, 3), “ Nemo tam humilis est, qui poenam vel summi hominis sperare non possit.”
Accuratius. “ With greater care.”—Qua cupiditas. Qua for aliqua.
Animi aquitate. “ In evenness of temper,” i. e., in a contented frame of mind.
Vastatis finibus. “ By the desolation of their frontiers, i 128 e., by laying waste the country that lies on their borders, and driving out the nations by whom it had been inhabited.
Proprium virtutis. “ A peculiar proof of their valour.” More literally, “ peculiar to their valour.”
Defendit. “Repels.” Equivalent to propulsat. Compare Ennius: “ Serva cives, defende hostes, cum potes defendere ;” and Quintus Claudigarius: “ Defendebat hostes a pinnis facillime.”
(Enn. Fragm. ed. Hessd. p. 219.)
Sed principes, 6tc. “But the chiefs of the provinces and cantons administer justice, and decide controversies among theii respective followers.”
Desidies minuenda. “Of removing sloth.” Minuenda, is here equivalent to toUenda, a meaning which this verb not unfire- quently has among the best writers. Compare the expression “ cow- troversias minuunt,” just preceding, and also B. G. 5, 26. The Lacedaemonians permitted predatory excursions, for a reason exactly similar to the one here assigned. (Davies, ad loc.—Cragius, due Rep. Laced. 3, p. 181.)
Profiteantur. “May give in their names.”—Causam. “The
Digitized by L»ooQleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
] 28 eittorprise ”—Ex iis. “ Of these,” i. e., of the individuals who
have given in their names, and expressed their readiness to fo.low him as a leader.
Omniumque rerum, dec. “ And all credit in everything is after this withheld from them.”
Hospites violare. “To offer violence to strangers,”—Quu “ All persons who.” Supply omnes before qui.
Trans Rhenum colonias, dec. Caesar refers probably to the same period that Livy mentions, 5, 34. The latter speaks of a Gallic colony having migrated, when Tarquinius Priscus was king at Rome, from their own country, towards the Hercynian forest.
Eratostheni. Consult Historical Index.—Orcyniam. The true root of the name is the German Hartz, i. e., Hartzrvald. Consult Geographical Index.
Summamque habet, dec. “ And enjoy a very high reputation for justice and military prowess.” Laus is here employed to signify, not praise itself, but what calls for praise. Compare Forcel- lini: “ Laus metonymice dicitur de recte factis, et virtute, quia his laudem meremur.”
In eadem inopia^ dec. “ In the same scarcity, want, and hardiness as the Germans.”—Eodem victu% dec. 4‘ The same sort of diet and clothing.”
GaUis. Referring to those of the Vole® Tectosages who had not migrated with the rest of that nation into Germany, but had remained in Gaul.—Et transmarinarum, dec. “ And their acquaintance with foreign commodities.” More literally, “ things that have crossed the sea.”
Multa ad copiam^ dec. “ Supplies many articles of luxury as well as convenience.”
129	1* Expedito. “ To an expeditious traveller.”—Finiri. “Be
computed.” Put here for dimetiri, i. e., to ascertain a space from limit to limit.
Oritur ab Helvetiorum, dec. “ It begins at the confines of the Helvetii,” dec.—Rectaque fluminis, dec. “ And stretches directly along the river Danube.” More literally, “ in a direct line {recta regione) as regards the river Danube.” The direction here meant is an eastern one.
Sinistrorsus, diversis ab flumine regionibus. “To the left hand, in a different direction from the river,” i. e., it turns off fro» the left bank of the Danube, and stretches to the north..
Hujus Germania. “In this part of Germany.”—Cum “ Although.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
b. Memoria prodenda. “ Worthy of being handed down to re- 129 membranee.” Compare the Greek paraphrase: red faofivnpovrieo-
iat u£ia.
Est bos cervi figura. The animal here described is, accord* ing to Cuvier, the reindeer. To the same effect are Buffon {Hist.
Nat. vol. xii., p. 82, ed. 1764, 4to) and Beckmann (Buschings Ab- handlungen). The term bos employed by Caesar has misled many, and induced them to imagine that the bison was meant, than which nothing can be more erroneous. The Romans were accustomed to use the term bos when speaking of any large-sized animal before unseen. Compare the expression Lucas boves applied to elephants. (Varro, L. L. 6, Z.—Plin, H. N. 8, 6.)
Unum cornu existit. “ There grows a single horn.”
Sicut palma. “ Like palms.” The reference is to the leaves, not to the tree itself. Beckmann, however, understands by palma here the blades of oars.
Alces. According to Cuvier, the animal here meant is the
“ elk,” or “ elendtfuer” of the Germans, and elan of the French^ C®sar’s description, however, he very justly regards as altogether false, but remarks, that the very same disadvantages under which the alces labour according to Caesar, are ascribed in popular belief to the elk, whence its German name “ elend,” which means “ miserable.” Compare Buffon, Hist. Nat. vol. xii., p. 83.	*	.
Varietas pellium. “ The varied colour of their skins,” i. e., their dappled or spotted skins.
Mutilaque sunt comibus. This account does not, of course, suit the elk, unless Caesar saw merely the female animal. Perhaps, however, he merely describes the elk from the account of others, and in this way has fallen into error. Compare note 9.
Sim nodis articulisque. “ Without ligatures and joints/
This, of course, is incorrect. A stiff appearance of the limbs may have given rise to the opinion.
Quo afilicta casu. “ Having been thrown down by any accident,” i. e., having accidentally fallen.—Erigere sese, &c.	“	Tc
raise or help themselves.”
Se applicant. “They lean.”—Paulum modo reclinata.
•* Reclining only a little.”
A radicibus subruunt. “ Loosen at the roots.”—Accidunk tantum. “ Cut in so far.”— Summa species. “ The full appearance.”
Infirmas arbores, Ac. “ They throw down by their weight the weakened trees ”
L l 2
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Ptfe.
17. Tertium est germs eorum, Ac. “ The third kind of these
animals consists of those which are called Uri.” According to
Cuvier, a species of mountain bull is here meant. The same distinguished naturalist thinks, that the bison and urus mark two distinct species, and that those writers, therefore, are in error who make the urns and bison the same animal. The German term for the urns is auer-ochs, contracted into vrrochs (whence the Latin urus), and meaning “ bull,” or “ ox, of the mountain,” i. e., wild bull, or wild ox.
Paulo infra elephantos. “A little less than elephants.” Here again Caesar speaks from hearsay, as the exaggeration respecting the size of the urus plainly indicates.
i Hos studiose foveis, Ac. “ These they take pains to catch
in pits, and so kill them.”
Adolescentes. In the common text homines adolescentes, but homines is not found in several MSS., and is quite unnecessary.— Exercent. Supply se.
Qua sint testimonio. “ To serve as a proof.” Equivalent tr ut ea sint testimonio.
Sed assuescere ad homines, Ac. “ These animals, however cannot, even though taken quite young, become accustomed to man and'tamed,” i. e., become domesticated and tamed. Compare, as
•regards the expression parvuli excepti, the language of the Greek paraphrase: vtoyyode Xaforree-
Amplitudo cornuum, Ac. “ The size, shape, and species of their horns.”—Hac studiose conquisita, Ac. “ These horns they carefully seek after, encompass them with silver around the rims, and uae them for drinking cups at their most splendid feasts.” This custom appears to have been very common among all the northern nations of Europe. Drinking vessels entirely of gold and silver, and fashioned like horns, have been dug up in Denmark. In the Runic calendars, moreover, festal days are marked by horns. Consult also Athenaeus, 2, 51.
Casar postquam, Ac. Having finished his digression respecting the manners, Ac., of the Gauls and Germans, Caesar here resumes his narrative, from which he had broken off at chapter 11.
Inopiam frumenti ventus. Dio Cassius says (40, 32), that Caesar was in fact afraid of the Suevi; but this is not probable.— Supra demonstravimus. Consult chapter 22.
Bellum Ambiorigis. Compare ehapter 5.—Per A*duennam silvam, Ac. These words and all that follow, as far as patet, in-
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Pa«a.
elusive, are strongly suspected of being an interpolation, for they 2 30 are absent from the Greek paraphrase, and appear, moreover, to clash with what has been stated in the third chapter of the 6th book.
The number, too, of miles in length (five hundred), is altogether too great. D’Anville thinks that the true reading was CL. (i. e., centum ct quinquaginta), from which, by an easy error on the part of the copyist, arose the other lection D. (i. e., quingentis).
Si quid celeritate, &c.	“	To	see	if	he	may	be	able	to	gain
any advantage by rapidity of march and favourable opportunity.”
Subsequi. According to the grammarians, the present is here employed for the future, subsecuturum esse. (Perizon. ad Sanct. Min. 1, 13.) In truth, however, Caesar here uses the present purposely, instead of the future, to give the narrative a more animated air, and bring the actions more directly before the eyes of
reader. Translate, therefore, “ that he follows.”
Basilus. He was afterward one of the conspirators who •sassinated Caesar.”—Ut imperatum est. “ As was ordered.”
Multum potest. “ Exercises a powerful influence.”—Magno casu.	“	By a singular accident.”—Ipsum. “ Ambiorix himself.”
Priusque ejus adventus, &c. “ And his arrival itself was ob- 131 served by the people, before any rumour or intelligence of that arrival was brought.” All this is wanting m the Greek paraphrase.
The true reading, moreover, is rendered very uncertain by the vari- - ations of the MSS.
Magna fuit fortuna, <fcc. “ It was a piece of great good fortune on his part, that, after every implement of war, which fie had around him, was taken away,” &c.
Hoc eo factum est. te It happened in this way.” More literally, “ on this account.”	-
Angusto in loco.	“	In	a	narrow	pass.”—IUum in equum, &c.
“ One of his friends mounted him on horseback.”
Ambiorix copias suas, &c “ It is a matter of doubt whether Ambiorix did not draw together his forces through choice,” i. e.T purposely avoided assembling his forces.— An tempore exclusus,
.«• &c.	“ Or whether he was excluded from this step by the shortness
i of the time, and prevented from so doing by the sudden arrival of out horse, believing, at the same time, that the rest of our army was coming after.”
Sed certe, &c.	“	But	one	thing	is	certain,	that	he	ordered,”
Ac.
In continentes paludes. The Greek paraphrast errs in render-
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
ing this els ret irhfctov IX*. The term continentes is here eqmva
lent to continuas. Compare B. G. 3, 28.
Alienissimis. “To total strangers.” — Cativolcus. The Greek paraphrast calls him KarlSovhcof.
Omnibus precibus, &c.	“ Having, with every kind of execra
tion, devoted Ambiorix to the gods below, for having been the author of that design, killed himself with yew, of whieh tree there is an abundance in Gaul and Germany.” The expression precibus detestari is equivalent here to diris devovere, i. e^ to devote a person to destruction with bitter imprecations. Compare the Greek paraphrase, rdaats tan/pdearo sardpaig.
Taxo. With the juice of the berry, or a decoction of the leaves, both of which are regarded as extremely poisonous to men and animals. (Compare Plin. H. N. 16, 10.) A modem writer, however, cited by Ffce (Flore de Virgile, p. 169), maintains, that the yew is harmless and may be used with advantage in medicine.
Omnium Germanorum, &c.	“	That	there was one common
cause for all the Germans,” dtc., i. e., that they were all joined in one common cause.
Quaestione captivorum. “ From an examination of the prisoners.”
1. Aduatucam. All the MSS. and early editions had ad Vatu- • cam, which Ursinus first, and after him Valesius (Notit. Gall, p
666), joined into one word Aduatucam. A town of the Eburones is meant, as appears from what is immediately after added, and not the city of the Aduatici.
Quintum Tullium Ciceronem. The brother of the orator, and already mentioned in the fifth book, chapters 38, 39, &c.
Sabim. The editions have Scaldem, which creates very great difficulty, since the Scheldt does not flow into the Meuse, and the “ Sylva Arduenna” did not extend to the confines of the Menapii, and the junction of the Scaldis and Mosa, if such junction ever existed. The Greek paraphrase, moreover, has Y.d6tv. They who defend the reading Scaldem, suppose that the Scheldt and Meuse formed a junction in Caesar's time, and that the aspect of the country has become subsequently altered.
Post diem septimum. Supply inchoatum. The phrase is equivalent to ante diem septimum finitum. Consult Clericus, Art. Crit. 2, 1, c. 10, 5.
Ut supra demonstravimus. Compare chapter 31.—Manus
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Page
urta nulla. 44 No regular force.’* Because Ambiorix had cot ] 32 drawn together his forces, but had ordered them to lie concealed.
Vicinitatibus. 44 To those who dwelt in the neighbourhood.** Compare Nepos, Alcib. 3, 44 Vicinitati negotium dant ;** and Suetonius, Vit. Aug. 6, “ Tenet que vicinitatem opinio.*1 We have here, to adopt the language of grammarians, the abstract for the concrete.
Magnamque diligentiam, &c.	“	And	it	required	great	vigi
lance, on the part of Caesar, not indeed to secure the safety of the whole army (for no danger could happen to them in a body, from a terrified and scattered foe), but to save the soldiers individually.”—
Ex parte. “ In some measure.”
Confertos. “ In large parties.”	133
Vellet. Supply Cctsar.—Diducendi. Equivalent to dividendi. Compare the Greek paraphrase, cal els roXXd iiapepitnfov if* ' t> arpdrevfux.
Instituta ratio. 44 The established discipline.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, b rSv *Fupalw iiba\b-
In nocendo aliquid omitteretur. Caesar means, that he rather omitted an opportunity of injuring the enemy, than injured them to the detriment of his own soldiers.
Legionarius miles. “ The soldiery of the legions,” i. e., the Homan soldiers, who composed the regular legions.
Pro tali facinore. “ As a punishment for such an offence,”
e., as was that which they had committed.—Stirps. “The race.”—Tollatur. “ May be annihilated.” Those of the Eburones who survived on this occasion became merged in the name and nation of the Tungri. Compare Ritter, Hist. Gall. p. 107.
Magnus undique, &c. There is nothing corresponding to this in the Greek paraphrase.
Appetebat. “Was drawing near.”—Reverti constituerat. Compare chapter 33.
Et quantos afferat casus. 44 And what changes she brings about.** Literally, “ how great accidents she brings with her ” Compare the Greek paraphrase, kal ir6aas iirepyd^erai avvrv\tas.
Manus erat nulla. 44 There was no collected body.”
Ultro. “Freely.”
Supra docuimus. Compare book 4, chapter 16.
Erat perfectus. 44 Had been constructed.” Perfectus is sere equivalent to confectus, or the simple factus. Many read im- verfcctuSy and translate the clause, “ where the bridge was incomplete,** i. c., partially destroyed, or broken off, by Caesar. Thie
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
ragv.
usage of imperfectus, however, is extremely harsh, and hardly id
accordance with the idiom of the language. The term would
rather carry with it the idea of something that had never been completed. If any change be allowed in the text, it would be perhapf the conjecture of Achaintre, who suggests persectus for perfectus.
Multos ex fuga, &c.	“	They	intercept	many stragglers at
tempting to escape.”
Non hos palus, 6cc. ** No marsh, no woods retard these men, bred up amid war and depredations.”
1. Fortunatissimis. A Graecism for fortunatissimos. This
construction is classed by grammarians under the head of attraction. Compare Zumpt, L. G. p. 366.
Prasidii tantum est. “ There is so little of a garrison.” Tantum is equivalent here to tam parum. Compare B. C. 3, 2, “ Tantum navium.”—Ut ne murus, & c. “ That the walls cannot even be manned.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, &<rre sal pit idvuodai av rd rod iptiparos r?7^oj auairXtjpovv.
Usi eodem duce. “ Having taken the same individual for a guide.”
De numero dierum, 6cc. “ That Caesar would keep his promise respecting the number of days,” i. e., during which he intended to be absent. Compare chapter 33.
Qui illius patientiam, 6cc. “ Who called his forbearance almost a siege,” l. e., complained that he kept them within the camp, with almost the same strictness as if an enemy were besieging the place.
Nullum ejusmodi casum, 6cc. “ Expecting no evenLof such a nature, as that by means of it any harm could be received within three miles of his camp, while there were nine legions, and a very large body of cavalry opposed to the foe, and the enemy themselves were dispersed and almost annihilated.” The nine legions, here referred to, were stationed in various quarters against the enemy. Cicero had with him the thirteenth legion and two hundred horse.
Qui hoc spatio, &c.	“	As	many	as	had	recovered in those
few days,” i. e., the days which had elapsed since Caesar’s departure.—Sub vexillo una mittuntur. “ Are sent out along with the detachment, under a standard of their own,” i. e., in a separate body By vexillum is commonly meant the standard or banner of the cav airy ; here, however, it denotes one under which the veteran foot who belonged to no particular legion, or the soldiers who were de tached from their legion, were accustomed to fight. Compare Lip* eius, Mil Rom. p. 48.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Sulsederat. “ Remained. ”	134
Cam. The comipon text has et casu, but we have rejected the copulative as Clarke and Oudendorp recommend. Compare the Greek paraphrase : iv rotfrp & Kurd avvrvytmv.
Ab decumana porta. “By the decuman gate.” This was the gate in the rear of the camp. Consult Archaeological Index.
Qui mb vallo, &c. “The sutlers, who had their tents pitched close to the ramparts.” Tenderent is equivalent here to tentoria haberent. Compare Virgil, JEn. 2, 29 : “ Hic Dolopum manus, hic setvus tendebat Achilles” On the other hand detendere is to break up an encampment. Compare B. C. 3, 85 : “ Taber- naculisque detensis.”
Mercatores. The sutlers were not allowed to reside within the camp, but pitched their tents without. They were so near, however, as easily to take refuge within the encampment, in case of any alarm. On the present occasion, the German horse came too suddenly upon them to allow of any escape.
Portas nostri tuentur. The German horse came directly 135 np to the gates, as there were no ditches in front of these.—Reliquos aditus. “ The other avenues of entrance.”
Neque quam in partem, &c. “ Nor to what quarter each one is to betake himself.”
Plerique novas, <fcc. “ Most of them form unto themselves strange superstitious notions, from the place where they were.”
The encampment wore an ill-omened appearance in their eyes, as connected with the overthrow of Sabinus and Cotta.
Captivo. The prisoner mentioned in chapter 35, and whom they had taken as a guide.
Qui primum pilum, <&c.	“	Who	had	been	chief	centurion
with Caesar.” Compare note 11, page 46.
Superioribus proeliis. Consult book 2, chapter 25, and book 3, chapter 5.
In statione. “ On guard.” The term statio gets the meaning here given it from its referring to a body “ standing” at their post on guard.
Relinquit animum Sextius. “ Sextius faints.” Davies is wrong in translating this, “ Sextius dies.” The Greek paraphrast gives the true meaning, iXuroxpSxvoe. From what follows, it will be perceived that Sextius was still alive, for how can one be said to be dead who is immediately after said to have been saved 1 The error arose lrom confounding the phrase relinquere animum, u to feint,” with relinquere anmam, “ to die.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK
135 ^odo corn*cripti, &c.	“	Those who had been only lately en
listed, and were, consequently, not familiar with the usages of war.” 131) I- ^'a^one*’ “The servants.” Compare book 2, chapter
and consult Archaeological Index.—In signa manipulosque. “ Among the standards and maniples,” i. e., among the very ranks of the soldiers. Compare the Greek paraphrase, els abras rdf r£>
'Vuifialutv rd^ng.
Cuneo facto. “Having formed a wedge.” Soldiers wero drawn up in the form of a wedge, in order to cut through the enemy’s lines. According to Vegetius (3, 19), the Roman soldiers call this arrangement caput porcinum. It seldom failed of proving successful, since the missiles of those who composed it were all aimed at one point.
Si. “Even if."—At. “Yet”
Nullo etiam nunct &c.	“	Having	as	yet	acquired	no	military
experience.” Compare the explanation of Achaintre, “ Qui nondum rei militaris experientiam habebant.”
Ex inferioribus ordinibus. “ From the lower ranks.”—Erant transducti. “Had been promoted.” More literally, “had been transferred.”
Fidem non faceret. “ He could not induce them to believe.” Literally, “he could not gain credit,” i. e., for himself.—Adesse Casarem. Hotomannus thinks that the following passage of Suetonius has reference to the events mentioned in this chapter. “ Casar obsessione castrorum in Germania nunciata, per stationes hostium, Gallico habitu penetravit ad suos” The opinion is a very probable one ; but for in Germania, we must read in Gallia a Germanis.
Pane alienata mente. “ As if almost divested of reason.” Literally, “ with an almost alienated mind.”
37	1- Untm questus. “ Having found fault with only one thing.”
Literally, “ having complained of,” &c.
Ex statione et prasidio essent emissa. “ Had been sent off from guard and garrison.”—Casu. Old form of the dative for casui.
Maxime mirandum videbatur. “ It appeared the most sur* prising.”
Optatissimum Ambiorigi, &c.	“	Had	incidentally	rendered
a most acceptable service to Ambiorix.”
Omnes vici, &c. A dreadful picture. Compare the remark of Barron : “ Horrenda malorum et arumnarum qua bellum secum affert imago hic nobis reprasentatur”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SIXTH BOOK.
Ac tape in eum locum, &c. “And matters often came to J37 each a pass (i. e., it often happened) from the number of hone
that were scattered in all directions, that the captives declared Am* *iorix had just been seen by them in his flight, and was not even yet
gone entirely out of sight; insomuch that some, who thought to stand high in the favour of Caesar, being inspired with the hope of overtaking him, and having assumed a task of infinite labour, almost overpowered nature by their zeal.”
Ad summam felicitatem. “To complete success.”—Atque
Me, &c.	“	While	he	kept	snatching	himself	from	their hands by
rhe aid of lurking-places *r forests.”
Duarum cohortium damno. Referring to the two cohorts cut io pieces by the Sicambri.
De Accone. Consult chapter 4.
More majorum supplicium sumsit. “ He inflicted pumsh jnent according to the custom of our ancestors,” i. e., he punished According to ancient Roman usage. What this punishment was wo learn from Suetonius (Ner. 49): “ Nudi hominis cervicem inseri /urcat, corpus virgis ad necem cadi."
Quibus cum aqua, &c. “After he had interdicted these ] 38 from fire and water,” i. e., had banished them. The expression aqua et ignis interdictio, or the forbidding one the use of fire and water, was the Roman judicial form of inflicting the sentence of banishment. By the operation of this formula the individual was banished from Italy, but might go to any other place he chose. In
the present case, it means banishment from the land of GauL
Exercitu. Old dative for exercitui
Mr
Digitized by GoogleBOOK VII,
Pag».
1- Cognoscit de Clodii cade. “ He receives intelligence of the death of Clodius.” A turbulent and licentious Roman, slain in
an encounter by Milo, or rather by the retinue of the latter at the command of their master.
Senatus consulto. In consequence of the troubles attendant upon the death of Clodius, the senate passed a decree that the In* terrex for the time being, the tribunes of the commons, and Pompey, who was outside the city, and proconsul, should see that the republic suffered no injury, and that the last-mentioned individual should hold a general levy throughout all Italy.
Ut omnes, &c.	“	That	all the youth of Italy should take up
arms.” In dangerous wars, or on sudden emergencies, the regular mode of raising soldiers was dispensed with. Two flags were displayed from the capitol, one red for the infantry, and the other of a green colour for the cavalry. On such occasions, as there was no time for taking the military oath in due form, the consul or commander merely said, “ Qui rempublicam salvam esse vult, me sequatur.” This was called conjuratio, or evocatio, and men thus raised were styled conjurati, as being bound all at once by a military oath or engagement, i. e., quia simul jurabant. On the contrary, when the regular oath was taken, one soldier was chOsen to repeat over the words, and the rest swore after him, every one as he passed along, saying, “ idem in me.n Consult Lipsius, Mil. Rom. 1, dial. 6, p. 42, and Stewecchius, ad Veget, c. 6, p. 20.
Retineri urbano motu Casarem. Plutarch well remarks, that had Vercingetorix waited a little longer, until Caesar was actually engaged mi the civil war, the rising of the Gauls would have appeared T]p$r less formidable to the Romans than the inroad of the
Cimbri and Teutones. (Vit. Cos. c. 27.)
1 De Acconis morte. Consult the last chapter of the previcus book.—Hunc casum, &c. “That this fate may fall in tnrr on
them.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Page
S.	Deposcunt, qui belli, &c. “ They call on some to begin the 14 J war, and assert the freedom of Gaul at the hazard of their own lives.”
Ejus in primis rationem habendam. “ That care should be taken in particular of this,” i. e., that this point qught particularly to be attended to.
In acie prostare interfici. “ That it was better to be slain in battle.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, xdXkiov that IXtyov pa\opi- vovs o$8f Iv irapardfei dxoBvfaiaiv.
Et quoniamy &c.	“	And	since they cannot, at present, give
hostages among themselves, as a security that the affair shall not be divulged, they require that an assurance be given them, by oath and on honour, the military standards being brought together for this purpose, by which custom their most sacred ceremonies are guarded.” Continere is here employed in the sense of custodire. Compare Cic. in Vatin, c. 5, “ Non custodem ad continendas, sed portitorem ad partiendas merces missum putatisand Terence, Eun. 1, 2,
“ Quo vera audivi taceo, et contineo optime.”
Ibi constiterant. “ Had established themselves there.” Sup ply sese.—Honestum equitem Romanum. The term honestus was specially applied to the knights, as illustris was to the senators.
The Greek paraphrast well expresses honestum here by xaXtv
K&ya&dv.
Illustrior. “ More remarkable than ordinary.”
Centum et sexaginta. Supply passuum, which appears m the common text, though omitted in many MSS.
Simili ratione. “ In like manner.”—Vercingetorix. The J name Cingetorix is equivalent, according to Celtic scholars, to Cim-cbdo-righf i. e., “ chieftain of a hundred heads,” or, in other words, “ a captain,” or “ leader.” Vercingetorix is the same appellation strengthened by a prefix, Ver-cim-cedo-right and meant “great captain,” or “generalissimo.” These are evidently twr titles of office, and the personal or proper names of the two indi viduals have perished. (Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. iii., p. 97, not.)
Gallio totius. The reference is to Celtic Gaul, not to the.
whole country. Gompare B. G. 1,1.	*
Quoscunque adit, &c.	“	As many of hi* countrymen as
has access to.” Civitate is here equivalent in effect to tota regime
Ex civitate. “ From the state,” i. e., from the country of the Arverni at large. Campare note 6, page 175, and the usage of the
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Tift.
 Greek language in the case of the substantive	—Appellatur
•• He is saluted.”
Qui oceanun attingunt. The Armoric states are meant Compare book 2, chapter 34, and book 5, chapter 53.
Efficiat. “Is to prepare.”—Quodque ante tempus. “And before what time.”—In primis equitatui studet. “ He turns his attention in particular to cavalry.”
Summam imperii severitatem. “ The utmost rigour of authority.”—Magnitudine supplicii, &c.	“	He	brings	over the waver
ing by the severity of his punishments.”
Aut singulis effossis oculis. “ Or having put out one of their eyes.” Some give a different turn to the clause, “ having put out their eyes for each,” making singulis the dative. The former, however, is preferable.
Cadurcum. “ The Cadurcan,” i. e., one of the Cadurci. So the Greek paraphrase has rdv KaSovpxov.
De consilio legatorum. “ By the advice of the lieutenants.” —Ad exercitum. “ With the army.”
Qui. An instance of what grammarians call synesis, where the relative agrees in gender, not with the antecedent, but with the person or thing to which that antecedent refers.
l. Ipti. Referring to the Bituriges.
Id eane de causa, &c.	“	Whether they acted thus for the
reason which they mentioned to the lieutenants,” dtc.
Quod nihil nobis constat. “ Inasmuch as we have no proof on the subject.”
His rebus in Italiam, &c. “Intelligence of these things being brought into Italy to Caesar.” The student will mark the force of the construction in Italiam.
Urbanas res, &c. Alluding to the agency of Pompey in quieting the disturbances that ensued after the death of Clodius.— Commodiorem in statum. “ Into a more settled state.”
Qui eo tempore pacati viderentur. For they might still entertain hostile feelings towards him, and would, therefore, gladly seize this opportunity of gratifying those feelings.
Omnibus consiliis, &c.	“	That	he	ought	to	prefer	a	setting
out for Narbo, to all other plans,” i. e. ought to go to Narbo before be did anything else.
Rutenis provincialibus. “ The Ruteni of the Roman province.” The allusion is to those of the Ruteni whose towns ?eer« incorporated in the province, fir there we)» others without its
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
limita. Compare the Greek paraphrase, rOvlvrjf sva^ylq 'Povnrrdv 143 cUrfvTuv.
In Helvios convenire. “ To rendezvous among the Helvii,”
e., to go unto the Helvii and assemble there.
Represso jam, &c. “ Lucterius being now checked and obliged to retire.”—Intra prasidia. “ Within the line of Roman garrisons.”
Durissimo, &c. “It being the most inclement season of the year.”—Discussa. “ Being cleared away.” Oudendorp prefers discisa, “ being cut away,” i. e., with axes, &c., as referring to the frozen snow.
Singulari quidem homini. “Even to a single person.”
Much less, therefore, to an army. The passage of Mount Ce- benna is to be ranked among the most memorable achievements of Caesar.
Quod hac de Vercingetorige, &c.	“	Because	he	had	already
conceived in mind, that these things would happen in the case of Vercingetorix,” i. e., that Vercingetorix would act in this way In Latin, usu venire is equivalent to accidere or evenire. Compare Cic. in Verr. 4, “ Quod ego in paucis tamen usu venisse eo moleste fero:1
Per causam. “ Under pretence.”
Recentem equitatum. “ A fresh body of cavalry,” i. e., afresh escort.
Aeduisque attribuerat. “ And had made tributary to the Aedui.” Compare the explanation of Mprus: “ Ut iis stipendio et tributa solver era.11
Oppugnare instituit. The boldness and despatch of Vercin getorix place him here in a very favourable light.
Ad consilium capiendum. “ As to what measures he should pursue.” More literally, “ with regard to the forming of a plan.”
Stipendiariis. “ The tributaries.” Compare note 13, page
—Expugnatis. Equivalent here to oppugnatis.
Ne ab re frumentaria, &c. “Lest he might suder incon- venience from the want of provisions, the conveyance being difficult.”
 Quam, tanta contumelia, &c. “ Than by submitting to so great an affront, to alienate from him the affections of all his friends.”
De supportando commeatu. “ To supply him with provisions ” literally, “ respecting the supplying of provisions.”
Altero die. “ On the second dav.”
Mm2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
rage.
6 Ai-ma conferri. The common text has proferri, which we
have changed to conferri, on the authority ot some of the MSS.
The latter is more in accordance with the manner of Caesar, and prevents the awkward similarity of sound between proferri and produci.
Ipse ut quam primum, &c.	“	He	himself	sets	out, in order
to arrive as soon as possible at Genabum, a town of fhe Carnutes,”
e., with the intention of reaching Genabum as quickly as possible. We have retained the common reading faceret, instead of conr ficeret, which latter does not sound well after conficeret in the previous clause. The meaning and reading of the passage have both been much disputed, but the punctuation of Oberliij, namely, a comma after Camutum, removes all the difficulty.
Cum longius, &c.	“	Thinking	that	it	could	be	protracted to
. a still longer period,” i. e., thinking that the place could hold out
for some time longer.
Et, quod oppidum Genabum, 6cc. “ And because a bridge over the Liger afforded the only means of egress from the town of Genabum.” Continebat is well explained by Daehne, “ ita coercebat, ut alius non esset exitus.” Oudendorp and most other editors make continebat equivalent here to “ was adjacent” or “ contiguous to,” but the propriety of such an explanation is more than questionable.
Excubare.	“	To	keep	watch	there,”	i.	e.,	at	the bridge.
Compare the Greek paraphrase, vpofsXaKttv.
1* Oppugnatione destitit. “ Desisted from the siege of Gergovia.” Supply Gergovia.
IUe oppidum, &c. After oppidum there follows in the common text Biturigum, positum in via, but as these words are wanting in most of the MSS. and earlier editions, and are included in brackets by many editors, we have rejected them at once from the text. The Noviodunum here meant was not the town of the Aedui, known by that name, but another place, between Genabum and Avaricum, now Neuvi-sur-Baranjon.
Conferri. The common text has proferri. Compare note 5, page 146.
Cum reliqua administrarentur. “While the other things were getting performed.”
Ex significatione Gallorum. “ From the signs made to one another by the Gauls.” Compare the explanation of Achaintre. “ cx signis vel nutibus quibus inter se Galli utebantur.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTES OK THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Pmf«
Committit. Hotomann suggesta committi, because Cesar 246 did not, as appears from what follows, engage personally in the fight. The objection is quite unnecessary, since committit and other verb^of the kind do not always imply personal agency or participation.
Anni tempore. The winter season, when the fodder waa stored away within doors.—Ex adificiis petere. “ Seek it from the houses.”—Deleri posse. “ Can be cut off.”
Hoe spatio, a Boia, dec. “At such a distance from Boia, J47 in every direction, as it appeared possible for the Romans to go
in order to obtain forage.” Great difference of opinion exists as to the true reading of this passage, some editors suggesting a Boiis, others in place of a Boia giving ab hoste. We have retained the common lection, though labouring under strong suspicions of being corrupt. Boia, according to Davies, refers to the territory of the Boii, just as Venetia is used for the country of the Veneti. B. G.
3, 9. We would rather regard it as an appellation, on the part of the Boii, for the city of Gergovia. Thus Gergovia Boia, i. e., Gergovia Boiorum.
Neque interesse, dec. “ And that it makes no difference whether they cut to pieces the latter themselves, or strip them ot their baggage, since if this be lost, the war cannot be carried on by them.” Quibus refers to impedimentis.
Neu suis sint, deo “ That they may neither be places of retreat for such of their countrymen as wished to avoid the war ” Literally, “ to their own countrymen, for avoiding the war.”
Romanis proposita. “ Placed as so many invitations to the Romans.” Literally, “ placed before their view unto the Romans.”
—ToUendam. Hotomann thinks this word superfluous here, but it is found in all the MSS., and, as Oudendorp remarks, its presence suits the plain and unelliptical style of Caesar.
Qua sit necesse, dec. There, is a striking resemblance between the advice here offered by Vercingetorix, and that on which he Russians acted in the memorable campaign of 1812. Vercingetorix would have done better, however, had he not spared Avaricum.
Proponebant. After this word there follows in the common text, quod se, prope, and the sentence is made to close with confidebant after recuperaturos. We have thrown out the words in question as manifest interpolations, in accordance with the opinions of Oudendorp, Morus, and many other editors. Some MSS. omk
Digitized by UooQleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
] 47	*e' P™?*» others want se prope, while others again for conjr
debant have ponebant.	As Moras well remarks, “Hoc sunt
certa indicia verborum assutorum.”
Flumine. The river here meant is the Avera, Bow Euvn, from which the city derived its name. Compare Mannert, Gcogr. vol ii., p. 129.
148 i Per certos exploratores. “ By trusty scouts.” The Greek
paraphrast errs in rendering this Sii KaraaKfam* riv&v.—In singula diei tempora. “ Every hour.” Equivalent to “per dngulas koras.” So the Greek paraphrase has correctly, naff Udonfv 6pat.
Incertis temporibus. “ At irregular times.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, b ioptrrots Kaipotg.
Casor. As regards the position of this word in the sentence,
compare note 9, page 110. In constructing take it first in order.— Qua intermissa, &c.	“	Which, not being surrounded by the rive*
and marsh, had, as we have before said, a narrow approach,” i. en where the intermission of the river and marsh left a narrow pea sage.
Alteri. Referring to the Aedui.—Nullo studio. “ Without any zeal.”—Alteri non magnis facultatibus. “ The others, having no great resources.” Referring to the Boii.
6. Affecto. “ Being straitened.” — Tenuitate Boiorum, dtc. “ Through the poverty of the Boii, the negligence of the Aedui.”
Et pecore, &c.	“	And were forced to satisfy their extreme
hunger by cattle driven to the camp from the more distant villages.” Ciacconius and Ursinus suggest abacto, but adacto is far preferable, and has all the MSS. in its favour.
Casar cum, &c. “ When Cassar addressed himself to the legions one by one, while at work.”—Si acerbius inopiam ferrent. u If they felt the scarcity too severe for them.” Literally, “ if they bore the scarcity too severely.”
Universi. “ They all with one accord.”—Sic se complures, dec. “ That they had, for several years, so conducted themselves under his command, as to have incurred,” dec.
Quam non parentarent. “ Than not avenge.” The primitive meaning of parentare is “ to perform the funeral rites of parents,’ or “ near relations,” i. e., to appease by such rites the shades of the departed. Its secondary meaning, as in the present case, is 11 U avenge,” i. e., to appease the shade of a deceased friend, or com* tryman, by the death of the one who had deprived him of life.
Genabi. Compare chapter third of this book.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
In arctiores silvas. “ In the thicker part of the woods,” i ] JQ e.f where the crowded state of the trees prevented access. T,he explanation of Davies is to the point: “ Ita vocat densiores, quia crebris arboribus arcebatur hominum aditus.”
Generatimque, &c.	“	And	being	arranged	tribe by tribe, ac
cording to their respective states.” We must either adopt this mode of translating the clause, or else agree with Morus, that in civitates is superfluous, for it would be a manifest pleonasm to say, as some do, “ being arranged by nations and states.”
Omnia vada ac saltus, &c.	“	They	held all the fords and
passages of this morass with strong guards.” More literally, with guards on which reliance could be placed. Compare the version of De Crisse, “ ils occupoient par de fortes gardes les guis et Us passages etroits qui se trouvoient dans le marais.”
Haesitantes premerent, &c.	“	They	would	overpower	them,
while sticking in the mire, from the higher grounds.”
Ut qui propinquitatem, &c.	“	So	that	whoever	saw	the	near
position of the two armies, would imagine that they were prepared to fight on almost equal terms ; while whoever regarded the inequality of situation would discover, that the Gauls displayed them selves to the view with only an empty assumption of courage,” i. e., made only an empty show of courage. Caesar means, that, if any one
1 observed how very favourably the Gauls were posted, he would perceive, in a moment, that they derived all their courage from their situation, and, throwing this advantage aside, were mere empty boasters.
Quanto detrimento, &c. “With how great loss, and with the lives of how many men, even victory must necessarily be purchased.” More literally, “ how great loss, &c., victory must ueccs-
' aarily cost.”
Quod castra, <5tc.	“	That,	as	to	his	having	moved	his	camp,
this was done,” &c.
J.	Munitione. “By a natural fortification,” i. e., by its own |50 strength. Supply naturali.
Cui rei, &c.	“	To	which	step	he	saw	them	inclined	through
the effeminacy of their minds.” i	3. Romani si casu, &c. “ That, if the Romans came up by
chance, they should thank fortune ; if invited by the information of \ any person, they should thank the informer, that they were enabled,” &c.
Eorum. Refening to the Romans — Virtutem. Irouical.—
Qui. Referring «till to the Romans
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
ra|«.
150 Q“,n ttlam ipsis, &c. “ Nay, that he even gave back the
command unto them, if they appear to bestow more honour upon him, than receive safety at his hands.”
Servos. “ Some soldiers’ servants.” Called on other occasions calones.
Operis laborem. “ The fatigue of the work,” i. e., the labour of pushing the siege, dec. Compare chapter 28.
Armis concrepat. “Clash their arms.”—In to. “In the case of him.”
|51	1. Majore ratione. “ With greater prudence.”
Quod penes eos, dec. The common text has pane in eo, which is inferior to the reading here given.—Summam victoria. “ The glory of the victory.” Compare the explanation of Cellarius; “ ne servati oppidi gloria solorum esset Biturigum, sed Gallorum omnium.”
Singulari militum nostrorum, dec. “ Devices of every kind, on the part of the Gauls, opposed the uncommon bravery of our soldiers,” i. e., the Gauls opposed, by devices of every kind, the valour of our soldiers, though displayed in a remarkable degree.
Ut est summa, dec. “ Since they are a race of consummate ingenuity.”—Qua ab quoque tradantur. “ That are imparted by any one,” i. e., which they see done by others.
Laqueis falces avertebant. “ They turned aside the hooks with nooses.” The falces, referred to here, are different from the mural hooks mentioned in the previous part of this work. (B. G. 3, 14, and 5, 42.) They appear to have been a species of ram, differing from the ordinary kind in having a curved, or hooklike, instead of a round iron, head. (Compare Vegetius, 4, 23.) The process, ulludeJ iu m the text, consisted in catching the head of this species of ram witn a noose, and either drawing it within by means of engines, or else raising the head on high, and thus overturning the vine® under which the hook or ram was worked. ( Vegetius, L c.—Appian, B. M. 74.)
Quas cum destinaverant, dtc. “ And when they had caught hold of them firmly, they drew them in by means of engines.” Destinare is here equivalent to “ laqueo prehensas falces figere.11 The term tormentum was applied by the Romans to any species of military engine or machine. Compare Cic. Ep. ad Fam. 15, 4, '* Aggere, vineis, turribus, oppugnavi, ususque tormentis multis.n The reference in our text appears to be to a species of crane.
Aggerem cuniculis, 6ce. “ They removed the earth of tho
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
mound by mines/* i. e., they undermine the mound. Wooden ] 5 ] props were erected until the excavation was completed, and then, fire being communicated and the props thus consumed, the mound fell in. Compare Vegetius, 4, 23, and Stewecchius, ad loc.
Magnet ferrariae. “ Large iron mines.**—Omne genus cuniculorum. “ Every species of mining.’*
Totum autem murum, dec. “ They had covered, moreover,
.he whole wall, on every side with towers of several stories.** The expression murum turribus centabulaverant is equivalent in effect to murum turribus contabulatis instruxerant. The ordinary meaning of contabulare is 44 to cover over with boards or planks,** 44 to plank or floor with boards,” 44 to raise or frame a building of timber, and of several stories,” dec.
Coriis. Towers of the kind mentioned in the text were usually covered with raw hides, as a protection against fire.
Aggeri. The mound was fenced or kept in by stakes, and to these the besiegers applied fire. The reference, however, is not merely to the mound itself, but to the wooden works and engines both upon and before it.
Et nostrarum turrium, dec. “ Moreover, by splicing the upright timbers of their own towers, they kept equalling the height of ours as fast as the mound had daily raised them; and, having countermined them, they impeded the working of our mines by means of stakes burnt and sharpened at the end, and by throwing apon our men boiling pitch and stones of very great weight, and did not suffer them to get near the walls.**
Quotidianus agger. As the mound kept increasing in size, by the addition of fresh earth, the towers erected on it were likewise increased in the number of their stories. These the enemy, on their side, kept equalling.—Expresserat. Caesar has here employed a technical term. Deprimere is “ to let down,” and exprimere, 44 to raise,” or 44 elevate.”
Apertos cuniculos, dec. The term apertos has given rise to much discussion, and great diversity of opinion. We have adopted he explanation of De Crissb. According to a well-known rule, epertos morabantur is equivalent to aperuerunt et morabantur. Compare the version of De Crissb, 44 Si nous ouvrions une mine, ils Pbventaient, et la remplissaient de pieux pointus,*’ dec.
Trabes directae, dec. 44 Straight beams, connected together in long rows,” i. c., long rows of straight beams, formed by connecting them at their extremities, and each row lying parallel to the
Digitized by GoogleNOTE8 ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
15] other. The expression perpetua in longitudinem is equivalent to
continuata serie nexa. The corresponding Greek form would be itqwiKtlt or wpeoixwt &s i* shown by Bos, Animadv. in Cos, p. 21, from Josephus, B. I. 7, 33.
Pariims intervallis distantes, &c. These long parallel rows of beams were each two feet apart.
Ha revinciuntur, <&c.	“	These	are	mortised together on
the inside, and then covered with a large quantity of earth,” i. e., one row is mortised to another. Introrsus is here the same as in latitudinem.
Intervalla. The space of two feet between the rows.—In fronte saxis, jkc. “ Are stopped closely in front with large stones.” The interior of the wall is filled up with earth, the facing is of stone.
Idem illud intervallum. Alluding to the distance of two feet between each row.—Neque inter se contingant, &c. Excepting, of course, where they are mortised.
Sed, paribus, &c.	“	But, equal spaces intervening, each
row of beams is kept firmly in its place, by a row of stones.” We have changed intermissa of the common text into intermissis, as more in accordance with the manner of Caesar, and as sanctioned by B. C. 1, 20, “ Nam certis spatiis intermissis,” &c.
Hoc cum in speciem, &c.	“	This	work,	both	as	regards
appearance and variety, is not unpleasing to the eye, beams and stones being placed alternately, which keep their own places in straight lines ; and, besides, it possesses very great advantage, as regards actual utility and the defence of cities.”
1* Quod et ab incendio, &,c. “For the stone facing defends
it from fire, and the timber from the battering-ram,” i. e., and the well-compacted timber forms a security against the blows of the ram.
Perpetuis trabibus, &c.	“	Long	rows	of	beams,	each	beam
*or the most part forty feet in length, being mortised on the inside.** Compare the explanation of Achaintre, “ Trabes erant perpetua in longitudine, quadragenis pedibus constantes.”
Picem. Hotomann inserts alii here, and is followed by Seal* iger. The emendation is unnecessary.
Ut, quo primum, &c.	“	So	that a plan could hardly be formed
at the moment, as to where we should first make opposition,”
e., so that it could hardly be determined at the moment, &c.
Instituto Casaris. “ By an established rule of Caesar’s.”— Partitis temporibus. “At stated t'/nes.” Literally, “at timet parcelled out between them.”
Digitized by GoogleNOTIS ON THS SEVENTH BOOK.
Turres reducerent, “ Drew back the towers.” These were the ®oveable towers, and were placed on wheels.—Aggertmque in- tsrscinderent, “ And made a cut across the mound,” i. e., severed the communication between the part on fire and the rest of the mound.
Quod deustos pluteos, &c. “ Because they saw the coverings of our towers burnt away.” The plutei here meant, were cover- ’ngs or defences erected on the tops of the towers, like a kind of roof, in order to protect the men while fighting. Hence the Greek paraphrast correctly calls them arfyij. Another species of plutei were in the form of moveable sheds, under which the soldiers worked. In either case, the plutei appear to have been formed of a framework covered with hides. Compare Vegetius, 4, 15. At first they were made of beams and planks, as the name pluteus literally denotes; afterward lighter materials, such as osiers, were employed. (Lips Poliorc. 1, dial. 7, p, 492, seq.)
 Nec facile,, &c.	“ And perceived that we could not easily	go
exposed to give assistance.”—In illo vestigio temporis positam,
“ Depended on that very juncture.”
Dignum memoria visum, “ Having appeared to us worthy of recording.”
Per manus transditas. “ Handed from one to another.”— Scorpione ab latere dextro, dec. “ Wounded in the right side, and deprived of life, by a crossbow.” As regards the term scorpio, con- quit Archaeological Index.
Transgressus. “Striding across.”—Eodem illo munere, jg4
4c.	“ Performed the same office,” i. e., of casting balls at our
works.—Altero. “ The second.”
Propugnatoribus. “Defenders.” Propugnator properly mean»
One, who, being besieged, defends the ramparts of a fortified position ; or, in nautical operations, one who fights from the deck of a vessel.
Restincto aggere. “ The fire of the mound being extinguished.” Compare Achaintre, “ restincto igne qui aggerem comprehenderat.”
Profugere. A Hellenism for profugiendi. The infinitive for the gerund is more frequent, however, in poetry than in prose. Compare Vechner, Hcllenolex. p. 265.
6 Natur ce et virium infirmitas. “ The weakness of their nature and strength,” i. e., the natural weakness of their bodily powers Nn
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
r«p-
An hendiadys for naturalis virium infirmitas.” So in Justm,
2: “ lams ueu* oe vestium,” for “ lanearum usus vestium
Misericordiam non recipk. “ Admits not pity/’ i. e., turns a deaf ear to every feeling of pity.—Significare. “ To give notice.”
Directisque operibus. “ And the works being now completely arranged/’ i. e., completed and arranged preparatory to the as sault. Compare the explanation of Oudendorp: “ ita dispositis, ut operibus illis jam factis noceri et appropinquari posset urbi. The reading of the MSS. varies here, several of them having perfectas instead of directis; but the former is evidently a mere gloss or interpretation of the latter. The idea of completion is implied in directi*. Some editions have derelictis, which is altogether wrong.
Non inutilem, &c.	“	Thinking	this	no bad time for forming
a plan,” i. e., for making some attempt on the town.
Intra vineas in occulto. Oberlin thinks that in occulto ought to be rejected, as being a mere explanation of intra tineas. Not so. The expression intra vineas does not mean “ under the vine»,” but “within” (i. e., behind) “the vine».” If the troops then were stationed behind the vine», they must, of course, be concealed some way, in order to escape the observation of the foe. Compare Barron, ad loc.
Expeditor. “ Ready for battle,” i. e., without any personal encumbrance except their mere armour.
Prctmia. Pecuniary rewards are meant. Compare B. H. 36, “ Casar, ob virtutem turma Cassiana donavit millia tredccim, at prafecto torques aureos quinque, et levi armatura 'millia decem.”
1. Obviam veniretur. “An attack should be made.” The
common text has obviam contra veniretur, but contra after obviam
is an awkward pleonasm, or, at best, a mere interpretation of obviam. We have therefore rejected it in accordance with the opinion of Morus, Hotomann, Ursinus, Faemus, and others.
Acie instructa. “ With their force drawn up to receive it,”
e., the attack.
Continenti impetu. “ Without stopping,” i. e., in the greatest haste. Continenti is here equivalent to continuo.
Cum se ipsi premerent. “ Crowding upon each other.”— Nec fuit quisquam, Ac. “ Nor was there any one of our men who seemed anxious for plunder.”
Genabensi cade. “ By the massacre at Genabum.” Compare chapter 3.—Labore operis. Compare note 7, page 150. The reference is to the fatigues of the siege.
Dig id by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK
Ex eorum concursu. “ From their coming in a body ” J 55
Disparandos. “ That they should be separated.” Two MSS. have dispertiendos, which is certainly the more usual form. Disparare, however, though of rare occurrence, is found in Plautus,
Pro/. Pud. 6, and in Cicero, de Inv. 1, 28 : “ Disparatum autem est id, quod ab aliqua re per oppositionem negatioms separatur.”
Qua cuique civitati, &c.	11	Whatever part of the camp had
(alien to each state originally,” i. e., according as a particular part of the camp had originally been assigned to each state.
Artificio quodam, &c.	“	By	a sort of art and knowledge m
assault.”—Errare, si qui, &c.	“	That they were mistaken, who
think that all the issues of affairs, in war, are going to prove successful,” i. e., who expect the issues of war to prove constantly successful.
Nimia obsequentia. “ The too ready compliance.” Compare chapter 15, and the explanation of Achaintre: “ Nimia facilitate, qua duces Gallorum atque ipse Vercingetorix precibus Bitun- gum cesserant.”
Consensu. Old form for consensui.
Ut castra munire instituerent. “ That they would set about fortifying their camp.”
Plusque animo, <fcc. “ And he was thought to possess ] gg greater forecast and sounder judgment than the rest.”
Insueti laboris. “ Unused to labour.”—Patienda et perferenda. “ Must be patiently endured.” Caesar here employs two terms nearly synonymous, in order to strengthen the signification.
 Qui Avarico expugnato refugerant. “ Who had escaped from Avaricum, after it was taken.”
Certum numerum. “ A definite number,” i. e., a fixed quota.
Avarici. Several MSS. have Avarico, but this is later Latin- ity. Compare Julius Obsequens, c. 114, “Asculo per ludos Romani trucidati;” and Justin. 2, 13, “ Consilium ineunt pontis interrumpendi, quem ille Abydo veluti victor maris fecerat.”
Teutomarus. The MSS. vary surprisingly as regards this proper name. The common text has Teutornatus, but the Greek paraphrast gives Tovropavos. We have adopted the form suggested by Oberlin. The Celtic termination in mar (i. e., illustrious, or ce»ebrated) is of very frequent occurrence, as in Viridomarus, dtc.
Exercitum ex labore, <&c.	“	Refreshed his army after their
fatigue and scarcity.”
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
1 Cum. “Whereas.”—Singuli magistratus. “A single
magistrate.”—Annum,	“ For a single year.” Some editions
have annuam, but this savours of a gloss.
Duo magistratum gerant. “ Two persons now exercise this office.”—Eorum. Referring to the nation of the Aedui.
Suas cujusque eorum clientelas. “That each of them has his own adherents,” i. e., his own clients or dependants. Client tela is here used for clientes, as elsewhere servitia for servi.
Detrimentosum. Two MSS. have detrimento suo, one detrimentum summum. Bentley suspects that we ought to read detrimento sibi fore. The objection to detrimentosum is, that it does not occur in any other writer, but still it is formed according t<- analogy, from detrimentum, just as portentosus from portentum.
Ea pars, qua minus sibi, Ac. Alluding to the defeated, or weaker faction.
Ne quid de jure, Ac. “ That he might not appear in any degree to infringe upon their privileges and laws.”
Docereturque, Ac. “And he was informed, that, only a few persons having been privately assembled for the purpose, one brother had been declared magistrate by the other, at a different place and different time from what he ought to have been.” Cotus had been declared magistrate by his brother Valetiacus, before only a few, and at an unusual time and place.
Denuntiatum. Equivalent here to declaratum. The formal word, in such cases, is renuntiare. Thus, renuntiatur consul, tribunus, Ac., i. e., declaratur factus.
Qui per sacerdotes, Ac. “ Who had been elected by the priests, after the usual manner of the state, the inferior magistrates being present.” Oberlin gives intermissis magistratibus, but acknowledges intromissis to be the preferable reading. This last is also in accordance with the Greek paraphrase, irap6vTwv rdv &px6vri*v- The grounds of Caesar’s selection of Convictolitanis were, his having been created magistrate by the priests, the regular authority in such cases, and, secondly, this having been done in the presence of the magistrates, not of a small and secret number of partisans.
1* in prasidiis, Ac. “ Which he might place in different
garrisons, to protect his convoys of provisions.”
Mi- “ To that officer.” Referring to Labienus.
Ab altera parte, Ac. “ Began to march on the opposite side of the Elaver.” The two armies were now pursuing a parallel route, along the banks of the Elaver, with the river between them
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK,
P«ge
Cum uterque utrique, &c.	“	As	each army was in sight J *jg
of the other.”—E regione.	“	Opposite.”
Quod non fere ante autumnum, &c. The Elaver was greater in the summer, in oonsequence of the melting of the snow on the mountains. By the time autumn arrived this increase of waters would have passed away.
E regione, &c.	“ Opposite one of those bridges.”
Captis quibusdam, &c.	“	Certain	cohorts	being selected,
that the number of the legions might appear complete,” i. e., in order to deceive the enemy, Caesar selected certain cohorts from the four legions which were ordered to march on, and arranged these cohorts in such a way as to give them the appearance of two additional legions, making up, together with the other, the whole number, as the enemy would suppose, of six legions, which they knew to be the strength of Caesar’s army. Meanwhile he himself lay concealed near the ruins of the bridge with the two legions which he had kept back. The verb capere is here used in the sense of eligere. Compare Terence, Hec. 4,1,22, and the remark of Donatus, ad Terent. Pkorm. 2,3,23: “ Capere dicimus, quum id, quod in nobis est, adsumimus, unde capere pro eligendo ponitur.” The reading of the passage we have just been considering is involved in much uncertainty. We have followed that of the best editors. The common text has captis quartis quibusque cohortibus. “ Having selected every fourth cohort.”
Iisdem sublicis. “On the^ame piles.”
Quintis castris. “ In five days* march.” Literally, “ by five encampments,” an encampment being made at the end of each day’s march, according to Roman military usage. Castra is here equivalent to the Greek oraOfidc, or the mansio of later La- tinity. Compare Xen. Anab. 1,2, 5, and Zeune, Ind. Or sec., s. v.
Perspecto urbis situ. ** The situation of the place being carefully reconnoitered.”
De expugnatione, &c. The meaning is, that Caesar saw it was impossible to take the place by any sudden assault or storm (dvd Kpdroc, as the paraphrase has it), and he must, therefore, seek to reduce it by a siege. Before, however, he entered upon the latter course, he would be compelled to make proper arrangements for a supply of provisions. Some MSS. omit the words desperavit ; de obsidione, and they are not followed also by Julius Celsus ; while, on the other hand, some give oppugnatione in place of expugnatione. Hence Oudendorp is led to suspect, that Cseear merely wrote, “ de oppugnatione non prius agendum constituit
Ns2
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
1. Qua despici poterat. “ Where there was a view down into
the Roman encampment.” Supply in castra Romana, and compare chapter 46.
Horribilem speciem. “A formidable appoarance,” i. e., us consequence of the immense multitude he had in arms.
Quid in quoque, dec. “ What spirit and valour there was in each one of his own men.”
Prohibituri. “ Likely to prevent.”—Non nimis firmo. Some recommend non minus firmo, on account of tamen, which follows; but the pointing which we have adopted for the whole sentence, from erat a regione, dec., makes the meaning clearly apparent. Cssar is speaking of a particular post, the possession of which would enable his men to cut off the enemy from water and forage. This post, it is true, was remarkably well fortified, and steep on every side ; Cesar, however, marched against it by night, dec., because it was only defended by a weak garrison. Tamen refers back, therefore, to the clause ending with circumcisus, and the parenthesis is merely explanatory.
6. Ut tuto, dec. “ So that his soldiers could even singly pass secure from any sudden attack on the part of the enemy.”
Ad Gergoviam. “In the neighbourhood of Gergovia,” i. e., under the walls of the city.—Assignatum. We have adopted this reading, as given in Oudendorp’s smaller edition, from five of the best MSS. The common text has adjudicatum, which is a mere gloss. Assignare is often used if the sense here given to it, by Cicero, Tacitus, Suetonius, &c.
Colloquitur.	“	Holds	a conference.”
Prcemium communicaL “He divides the bribe.” Some MSS. and early editions have primum communicat, which appears to have been the reading of the Greek paraphrast, and also of Julius Celsus. Scaliger, however, correctly defends the common reading, as more in accordance with the context. Compare what follows a little after, “ celeriter adolescentibus et oratione magistratus et praemio deductis,” <kc.
Ejus. Referring to the state of the Aedui.—Qua transducta. “ And that if it were brought over,” i. e., to the common Gallic cause.
Esse nonnullo, dec. “ That he had, it was true, received some marks of friendship from Caesar, yet only so far as to have
burned at his hands a decision that was peifectly just in itself»
Digitized by GoogleN0TE8 ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
p*i**
That he owed more, however, to the cause of their common free- 159 dom,” i. e., than to the claims of private friendship.
Disceptatorem. “ As an arbitrator.’1 Compare, in defence of this reading, the remarks of Gronovius, ad lav. 88, 35.
Decem Mis millibus. Compare chapter 34.	160
Qum, nefario, dec. “ But that, after having committed so nefarious a deed, the Romans are now hurrying hither to put us to death.”
Ostendit does Romanos, dec. “ He points, with these words, at some Roman citizens, who were proceeding in company with them, relying upon his protection.”—Magnum numerum frumenti, dec. The persons plundered were Roman traders, who were conveying provisions to the army.
Suas injurias. “ The wrongs they had received.” Suas a sere equivalent to sibi illatas, and is taken, as the grammarians term it, passively.
Genere dispari. “Of inferior descent.”—Transditum. Jg “Recommended.” — In equitum numero convenerant. “Had come in the number of the horse.”—Ab eo. Referring to Cesar.
Quorum salutem, dec. “ Since their relations could neither neglect their safety, nor the state regard it as a matter of small amount,” i. e., the Aedui would not abandon so many thousand of their countrymen, nor unite with Cesar against them.
Nulla interposita dubitatione. “ Without a moment’s hesitation.”—Nec fuit spatium, dec. This remark is made to show the urgency of the crisis, since the Roman camp occupied a wide space of ground, and ought, as a matter of common prudence, to have been contracted in its limits on the departure of so large a force.
Immisso equitatu. “ The horse being sent on.”—Interdicit- que. “ But charges.”—Inter equites versari. “ To move about among the horse.”
Deditionem significare. “ To make signs of submission.”
Cum suis clientibus. “With his followers.” These were the same with the Soldurii, mentioned in the 22d chapter of the third book.—Gergoviam profugit. Casar would appear to have allowed Litavicus and his followers to escape for the following reasons: 1st. These turbulent men would be less formidable among the enemy, than in the bosom of the Aeduan state ; and,
2d. He wished to conciliate the favour of the Aedui, whom he aright have offended by any severity towards Litavicus Had it
Digitized by GoogleNOTBS ON THB SEVENTH BOOR.
161 001 been for these or similar motives, he mignt easily have slopped
the fugitives with his cavalry.
Qui suo beneficio, &c.	“ To inform them that they had oeen
spared through his kindness, when he might have put them to the sword by the right of war.**
]g2	1- 'dd Gergoviam. “To the vicinity of Gergovia.” More
literally, “ to before Gergovia.” Compare Zumpt, L. G. p. 265.
 Equitet. “ A party of horse.”—Fuerit.	Clarke suggests estety because the horsemen announced, according to him, in how great danger affairs then were {tunc temporie esset). In this he is wrong. The horsemen announced, on the contrary, in how great danger affairs were when they left the camp, i. e., quanto in periculo res fuerit, quum equites missi sunt.
Eisdem in vallo> &c. Because they were too few in number to allow of some succeeding to others. Hence there is no necessity for our reading eodem in place of eisdem, as some suggest.
Pluteosque vallo addere. “ And was adding parapets to the rampart.” By plutei are here meant a kind of breastwork. Compare note 7, page 153, where the same term is employed to denote a species of roof for a tower.
6. Ad cognoscendum. “ To become fully informed.” Compare the Greek paraphrase: rhv roS paros &X$8siav yw&oKtiv.
Adjuvat rem, dec. “ Convictolitanis helps forward the sinking posture of affairs,” i. e., he fomented the disturbance, brought about and carried thus far through his own and the schemes of Litav- icus.—Ad furorem. “To open outrage.” More literally, “to some mad act.”
Data fide, dec. “ They entice from the town Cabillonum, ou a promise of safety,” i. e., of being allowed to proceed safely to his place of destination.—Idem facere. To follow him out of the town, and take their departure.
Quaestionem de bonis, dec. “ Order an inquiry to be made concerning the plundered property.” i. e., the property of which the Roman traders had just been pillaged. By quastio is here meant a judicial investigation.
Recuperandorum suorum causa. Alluding to those of their countrymen at present in the hands of Caesar.—Sed contaminati facinore, dec. “But being tainted with guilt, and charmed with the gain arising from the plundered goods, because many persons had a share in this,” dec. The term compendium is well rendered in the paraphrase by a, and denotes, in general, any benefit orNOTES ON THE 8EVENTH BOOK.
advantage (lucrum temporis, pecunta tel opera), though here re- Jg2 fairing specially to a share of the plunder.
Nihil st propter inscientiam, &c. “That he did not con- ]g3 ceive a worse opinion of the state, for the ignorance and fickleness
of the lower orders, nor lessened in aught his regard for the Aedui.” Compare die Greek paraphrase, ob<	xpit rijv x6\iv SiaxeTeBat,
col obSb frror Sii rubra abrjj ebvovs ilvai \iymv.
Omnem exercitum. Referring to his own and the forces of Labienus.—Ne profectio, dec. “ Lest a departure, proceeding from a fear of revolt, might wear the appearance of a flight.”
Accidere visa est facultas. “ An opportunity appeared to offer.”—Minora castra. Compare chapter 36.—Operis. Referring to the fortifications of the enemy.
Dorsum esse ejus jugi, dec. “ That the top of this hill was almost level, but that it was likewise covered with woods and narrow, and that by it there was a passage to the other part of the town.” The reading here given is that of almost all the MSS. Davies, however, suggests hoc (scil. parte) silvestre et angustum, qua, dec.; and Oudendorp, on the other hand, gives, on conjecture, hinc silvestrem, dec. We have preferred retaining the common lection with Barron, Achaintre, and others. The opponents of this reading consider hunc silvestrem a violation of the grammatical rule of gender; but the truth is, that Caesar here employs, for the sake of perspicuity, the old Latin form dorsus, of the masculine gender. Thus, in Plautus {Mil. Glor. 2, 4, 44), we have, “ Timeo quid return gesserim: ita dorsus totus prurit.”
Uno colle ab Romanis, <fec. Comparo chapter 36.
Prima luce, dec. The common text has, after castris, the following, mulorumque produci, eque iis stramenta. We have rejected all this with some of the best editors. Nothing analogous in meaning is found either in Celsus or the Greek paraphrase ; and, besides, the words in question are omitted in several MSS., as also in the Basle edition. The idea implied in mulorum is already expressed by impedimentorum, while the words eque iis stramenta appear to have crept into the text from the margin, where they were originally inserted as an interpretation of the erroneous reading mu- ^rum. The Greek paraphrase is as follows : Udpxolv Si col oKtvof- tyttv vXijfdof, fjta rfj bptpq, U roxi urparoxiSov l%ayay&v, roTs bnroxtyoif rprfwy IvSbrraf, Hare Ixxfav S6$av rots xo\e (doit xapfytiv, k. r. \.
Mulionesque cum cassidibus. “ And the muleteers, with helmets on them.” By muliones are meant the drivers of the baggage. NOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Pi*®
8- Ostentationi* causa, “ To make a show.*’—Easdem rtgi
ones. “ One and the same quarter.’*
Tanto spatio. “ At so great a distance.”—Explorari. Sup ply a Gallis. Referring to the Gauls in Gergovia.
Eodem jugo. “ Towards the same hill.” On the occasion al use of the dative, to mark motion towards a place, instead of the accusative, consult the remarks of Perizonius, ad Sonet. Min. 3, 14 (vol. i., p. 749, ed Bauer), and compare the Latin forms, quo, co, hue, &c.
i Illo ad munitionem. “ To that quarter, for the purpose of
defending it.” We have adopted the emendation of Vossius,
which rests on the authority of one of his MSS. The expression ad munitionem is equivalent to ad locum defendendum, and derives additional confirmation from the words munitionis causa, which occur near the commencement of chapter 48. The common text has illo munitionum copies, &c., and they who adopt it make munitionum depend in construction upon copies, i. e., “the forces throughout the fortifications.” It would be better to make illo govern munitionum, i. e., “ to that quarter of the fortifications.”
Insignibus. “ The military insignia.” These were of various kinds, according to the rank of the wearer. The standard- bearers, for example, had helmets covered with bearskin, the pilani wore on theirs the skins of wolves, &c. Compare Lipsius, Mil Rom. Analect. ad dial. 2, p. 436.
Raros. “ In small parties.” Compare the Greek paraphrase .
iXlyovs ear' d\lyovf.
Occasionis esse rem, &c.	“	That	the affair depended upon
opportunity, not upon valour,” i. e., upon the sudden seizing of an opportunity, &c.
Recta regione, &c.	“	In	a	straight	line, if no winding inter
vened.” Morus regards recta regione as a mere marginal gloss. It is found, however, in all the MSS. Besides, if there be a gloss anywhere, it is rather in what follows, viz., "si nullus anfractus intercederet.”
Quicquid huic, &c.	“	Whatever	of	circuit was added to this
ascent, in order to render the declivity less difficult, this served to increase the length of the route,” i. e., whatever circuit they were obliged to take in order to lessen the steepness of the hil., on$ increased the length of the journey.—Huic.	Supply ascensui.
The reference is to the ascent in a straight line.
Presduxerant The emendation of Scaliger, in place of
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Page
the common reading produxerant. It is supported by good J 04 MSS.
Trinis castris. “ Of three separate camps,” i. e., the camps three separate Gallic nations. Caesar purposely uses the distributive here, as denoting that the different Gallic states, in the combined army, had separate encampments, according to what has oeen said in the 36th chapter. Of these camps he here takes three, in one and the same onset.
Superiore corporis parte, dec. He appears to have laid aside, as Hotomann remarks, his thorax, or piece of armour that covered the breast.
Consecutus id, dec. Achaintre does not exactly see what object Caesar had in view by this movement. The answer to this may be given in the words of the Roman commander himself (chap. 53), u ad Gallicam ostentationem minuendam militumque animos confirmandos.”
Retinebantur. “ Were sought to be kept back.” The im- 'perfect here denotes the efforts of the officers to restrain their troops
from advancing too far. With what success this was done is stated immediately after, sed, elati, dec. “ But our men, notwithstanding their efforts (i. e., the efforts of their officers to restrain them), flushed with the hope of a speedy victory,” dec.
Vestem. This term may be rendered here by “ vestments,” J @5 but it refers, in fact, to various other articles besides mere cloth
ing, such as coverings for couches, hangings, dec.
Pectoris fine prominentes. “ Bending forward over the walls as far as the lower part of the bosom.” Some MSS. have pectore nudo, and with this the Greek paraphrase agrees, yu/iv$ r$ er/jdsi xpovevAfitvai. The reading we have adopted, however, is far more elegant. Compare B. A. 85, “ Umbilici fine Apuleius, Flor. N.
“ Scapularum finibus” dec.
Avaricensibus preemiis. “ By the rewards obtained in the storming of Avaricum,” i. e., by the plunder obtained on that occasion.—Neque commissurum, dec. “ And would not allow any one to scale the city wall before him.”
Tres suos manipulares. “ Three men of his own company.**
Exceptans. “ Taking hold of.”—Extulit. “ Drew them up.”
Munitionis causa. “ To defend that quarter.” This expression appears to confirm the emendation of Vossius, mentioned in note 1, p. 164.
Nec loco ncc uumcro. “ Neither as regarded situation nor
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THB SEVENTH BOOK.
numbers.” Well expressed by the Greek paraphrase, mr* rk
thru teal MfOr Afutyto.
Spatio pugna. u Tbe long continuance of the fight.” Spatium is here equivalent to longinquitas or diuturnitas.
Prametuens. “ Being apprehensive.” A very elegant term. Compare Lucretius, 3, 1031:
“ At mens sibi conscia facti, Prametuens adhibet stimulos, torretqueflagellis”
»• Ab latere nostris aperto. “ On our expoeed flank.”
Similitudine armorum. The Aedui were armed after the general Gallic manner, and hence were mistaken for enemies by the Roman soldiers.
Exsertis. “ Bare,” i. e., left bare and unencumbered of dress. The custom here alluded to by Caesar has given rise to much discussion. Among the Romans, the bare shoulder was a sign of war or of the hunt; but among the Gauls, as he himself informs us, one of peace. It is most probable that there was some regulation between 4he Roman and those of the Gallic states that were subdued, by virtue of which, tho forces of the latter, when engaging in battle with the Romans against their countrymen, wore one shoulder bare in order to be more easily distinguished from the rest of the Gauls
Excidere. We have here given the reading of the best MSS. The common text has exscindere. Consult Duker, ad Flor. 2, 2, 37.
6. Ac suis saluti fuit. “ And preserved his own men by his death.” Clarke gives vita in place of saluti, from some MSS. But saluti is the preferable reading, as vita is used only a short distance before.
Intolerantius. “Too eagerly.” A much more expressive term, in Latin, than cupidius.
Exceperunt. “ Supported.”
(67	1* Q110 procedendum. “ How far they ought to proceed.”—
Neque constitissent. “And because they had not halted.”— Neque a tribunis. Compare note 5, page 23.
Exposito, quid, &c. “ Having set before them what disadvantageousness of situation could effect,” i. e., the evil which might accrue from a disadvantageous situation.
Dimisisset. “ He had given up/’—Parvum modo detrimm» tum. “ Only a trifling loss.”
Quanto opere. By how much,” i. e., as greatly as.t VTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
6. Plus se sentire. “ That they knew better.”—Desidemre. J g'J “ Wished to see.”
Ad extremum. “ At the conclusion.”—Ne animo permoverentur. “ Na to be dispirited.”
Eadem da profectione, dec. “ Entertaining the same views as regarded his leaving the place, that he previously had.” Caesar alludes here to his original intention of going to the Aedui, who were on the eve of revolt, and whom he was desirous of retaining in their allegiance to Rome. Compare chapter 43.
Reduxit. Referring to Caesar.
Appellatus. “ Having been applied to,” i. e., having been waited upon.—Et ipsos antecedere. “ For themselves also to go before him. Some editions have procedere, which amounts to the same thing.
Horum discessu admaturari. “ Would only be hastened by the departure of these.”—Eos retinendos non censuit. De Crissb indulges in some very able remarks, condemnatory of Caesar’s con duct upon this occasion, as being deficient in military foresight and prudence.
Multato? agris. “ Deprived of their lands.” Multare aliqua 108 re is to deprive one of anything, as a mulct, or fine, in punishment
for some offence that has been committed. Caesar refers here to what has been stated in the thirty-first chapter of the first book.
Quamque in amplitudinem. “ And to what political consequence.” The Aedui, at this time, numbered among their clients the Segusiani, Ambivareti, Brannovii, Aulerci Brannovices, Boii, and Mandubii.
Omnium temporum, dtc. “ The dignity and influence of all the previous periods of their state.”—His datis mandatis. “ Having charged them to bear these things in mind.”
Huc Casar, &c. Caesar, in military language, had made Noviodunum his centre of operations, what the Greeks call bpmrfjptov.
6. Bibracte ab Aeduis receptum. “ Had been received by the Aeaui into Bibracte.”
Tantum commodum.	“ So advantageous an occasion.”
Si re frumentaria, &c. We have adopted the reading recommended by Morus, excluding as a mere interpolation the words out adductos inopia ex Provincia excludere, which are made to follow after Romanos excludere. The reasons for this lection are ably given by Moms.
6 Ex nivibus. “ By the melting of the snows.”
O o
Digitized by ogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK
r»fB.
9- Si esset in perficiendis, &c. “ Even if some risk was te be run in completing the bridges.” Compare the explanation of
Baron, “ Etiamsi aliquid periculi in perficiendis pontibus subeundum fuisset.”
i- Id nemo, &c. We have given the reading of Morus, which has been adopted also by Oberlin and Daehne. The ordinary
lection is {ut nemo non tunc quidem necessario faciendum existimor bat), cum infamia, dec.
Quod abjuncto Labieno, dec. “ Because he feared greatly for Labienus, separated from him, and for the legions which he had sent along with that officer.” We have given abjuncto on the authority of several MSS., with Oberlinus, Le Maire, and Daehne. This same reading meets with the approbation also of Davies and Moms, and is in accordance, too, with the language of the paraphrase, ixim Aa6tt]v$. Oudendorp, following the conjectural emendation of Ciacconius, gives Agendico in place of abjuncto, but the former is a far inferior reading.
Pro rei necessitate opportuno. “ Sufficiently suitable, con •idering the urgency of the case.”
Perpetuam paludem. This, according to Achaintre, is the part of Paris now known by the name of le Marais.
Difficilius. “ With more difficulty than he imagined.”— Egressus. Labienus having tried the city on the south, and being impeded by the marsh, determined to make an attack on the north, and marched, therefore, to Melodunum, the modem Melun.
J70 L Profecti a palude. The MSS. vary. We have given the reading which is followed by most editors, and which is in accordance with the Greek paraphrase : Ik r?u	l^e\Q6vrts> Ciacco
nius, however, conjectures protecti, which Achaintre adopts and strongly advocates.
Secundo Gallia motu. “ A successful commotion in Gaul.” Secundo is here, according to Hotomannus and Moms, equivalent to " qui prospere successerat.” Many, however, translate it as a mere numeral.—Interclusum itinere et Ligeri. “ Stopped on his route by the Liger.” Equivalent to interclusum itinere Ligeris transitu. Literally, ” cut off from his route and (from crossing) the Liger.”
Infideles. “ Not firm in their attachment.” Compare Cicero, Ep. ad Fam. 15, 4, “ Ex alienissimis sociis amicissimos, ex infidelissimis firmissimos redderem.”
Pralioque hostes ucesseret, &c. The fighting that took
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
place, after he had formed the resolution of leading off his army J 70 safe to Agendicum, was rendered necessary by the circumstances of the case, since he could not retreat without some collision with the foe ; his chief object being to avoid, if possible, a general engagement.
Maximam opinionem. “ The highest reputation.”
Distinebat. Render interclusas distinebat as two verbs “ cut off and kept away.” The river was the Sequana; the baggage was at Agendicum. Compare chapter 57.
Secundo flumine. “Down the river,” i. e., following the current of the stream (secundo quasi sequendo). So a little farther on we have adverso flumine, “ up the river,” i. e., against the
stream.
Castris. According to Achaintre, the Roman camp was pitched on the slope of what is now Mount Saint Genevieve : “ tn dejectu montis Sancta Genovefa.”
Conquirit etiam lintres. “He collects also some small boats.”
Eum locum petit, &c. The Roman army was thus divided J into three separate bodies, and the object of this skilful arrangement was, to leave the enemy in uncertainty as to the particular spot, where Labienus intended to convey his troops across.
Exercitus. “ The infantry.” So called here because forming the main part of the army (exercitus maxima pars). Comparo no*B 4, page 92.
Administrantibus. “ Superintending.”
Prater consuetudinem tumultuari. “ That there was an unusual tumult.” Tumultuari being a common verb, not merely a deponent, is here employed impersonally in the passive. By a common verb is meant one which, under a passive form, has both an active (i. e., deponent) and passive meaning. The truth is, deponent verbs in Latin are regular middle verbs; and when we speak of a common verb, we refer in fact to the middle and passive voices of one and the same verb. What tends to confirm this remark is, the fact of so many old active forms of such verbs being found in the fragments, that have reached us, of the earlier Latin writers.
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK
suit Cellarius, Geogr. Ant. vol ii., p. 166, and Le BoueJ,
Reeueil dt divers icrits servant a VHist. de France, vol. i., p
169.
Nec dabat suspicionem fuga quisquam. “ Nor.did any one of them betray the slightest suspicion of an intention to flte.”
Eandem fortunam tulit. “ Met the same fate.” Literally, “ bore off the same fortune.”
1* ^'onira castra Laleeni. “ Over against the camp of Labi
enus.”
Hoc negotio confecto. Caesar says nothing here of the five cohorts that were left as a guard for the camp. They would appear to have followed, when the battle was over, the five other cohorts that went up the river with the baggage. So, also, no mention is made of that part of the Gallic forces, which was stationed on the opposite side of the river, over against the Roman camp. It is probable, that they fled through the woods, and joined the rest of the fugitives, when they heard of the defeat of their countrymen.
Horum supplicio, &c. Hotomann thinks it incredible, that Gauls would treat their own countrymen thus, when the latter were Roman hostages. The fact, however, is expressly stated by Celsus, and is only another proof, after all, of the barbarous habits even of the mo» a civilized part of the Gauls.
Rationesque belli secum communicet. *< And communicate to them his plans for conducting the war.” Compare the Greek paraphrase : Iva n affriat irtpl rov iroX/pou ivaKotv&aaiTO.
fi. Re impetrata, &c.	“	Their	request	being	granted,	they	insist
that the chief command be made over to them,” i. e., the supreme administration of affairs.
Multitudinis suffragiis, &c.	“	The	decision	is	left	to	the
votes of the multitude. To a man they all make choice of Vercingetorix as commander.” Literally, “ approve of,” i. e., by their votes.
IUi. “ The former two.” Referring to the Remi and Lingones.
Et Casaris in se, &c.	41	And they miss Casar’s indulgence
towards them,” i. e., they regret, feel the loss of, dec. The Aedui found Vercingetorix far different from Caesar, and felt the loss of that importance which they had enjoyed as a people through the favour of Caesar. Compare the explanation given to requirunt by Clarke, “desiderunt, amissam sentiunt”
Suum consilium, &c.	“	They	dare	not	pursue	their	own
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
measures separately from the rest,” i. e., pursue a separate inter- ] 72 est from the rest.
Denique. Hotomannus suspects an error of the text here» and proposes Diemque et rei constituit. But denique here denotes,
“ in a word,” and must not be changed.
Quindecim millia. Some read millium, but millia is by epexegesis, or opposition with equites.
Provincia. In many MSS., and in some editions, ei is in- 173 serted before provincia, and by ei provincia the Aedui are thought
to be meant. This is altogether erroneous. The Roman province is referred to.
Quorum mentes, Ore. “ Whose minds, he hoped, had not settled down into a calm state Irom tne foimei war,” i. e., were not vet reconciled to the losses they haa sustained in their former war with the Romans. The war, here alluded to, is that in which the Allobroges lost their independence, and were biought under the Roman yoke. Nine years had now elapsed since that period.
Ad hos omnes casus. “ Against all these contingences.”
Suos fines. We have recalled fines into the text, with
Achaintre, on MSS. authority. Compare the Greek paraphrase: rhv of As	itafvXdmvei.
Sed et equitibus Romanis. “ Nay, even from the Roman knights.” By equitibus Romanis are here meant, not the Roman cavalry, but persons of the equestrian order, who were at that time with Cssar. The expression sed et has given rise to some discussion, as it almost always does when it occurs by itself, as in the present instance, in a Latin text. The reason is, that, since non mode, or some equivalent form, does not precede, it is a matter of uncertainty whether the conjunction sed has proceeded from the writer himself, or has been inserted by some copyist. (Compare Crusius,
Ind. Lot. ad Sueton. vol. iii., p. 337.) In the present case it must certainly be retained. As regards the peculiar nature of this form of expression, consult Bauer, ad Sonet. Min. 4, 7, vol. ii., p. 30f\ and compare the remarks of Hoogeveen on AAX4 *«i, p. 20, Glasg. ed.
Evocatis. Consult Archeological Index.
Toti Gallia. The whole of Gaul, and not merely Celtxca is meant. So a little farther on, “ Galliaque excedere.” Some editions have tota Gallia, which will be equivalent to per totam Galliam.
Atque in to morentur. 11 And delay for this purpose,” i. e., J 74 stop marching and turn about for this purpose —Magis futurum •* Would rather be the case.”
O o 2
Digitized by Google♦
JtOTBS ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
174	8 El dignitate. “ And of their honour.”
Copias omnes, Ac. The whole army was to be drawn out under arms before the camp, both to strike terror into the foe, and to encourage also by their presence the Gallic cavalry, whilq engaged with the enemy’s horse.
Dua acies. “ Two of these divisions.”—A primo agmine. “ In front.” The Roman army is called agmen, because on its march, while the divisions of Gallic horse, being prepared for battle and for acting on the offensive, are denominated acies.
Una. “ At one and the same time.” According to Plutarch (Vit. Cats. c. 26), Caesar lost his sword in this battle, and the Arverni suspended it in one of their temples. His friends having pointed it out to him on a subsequent occasion, and urging him to have it taken down, he smiled, and declined granting their request, regarding the sword as a thing consecrated to the gods. If the story be true, CsBsar must, as Plutarch remarks, have received some check in the commencement of the action.
Eo signa inferri, Ac. “ Caesar ordered the standards to be advanced and the army to face about towards that quarter,” L e., the army to face to that part and charge the foe.
Spe auxilii. Because they knew from this, that if they were pressed too heavily Caesar would come to their aid.
Germani. We learn two things very clearly from these commentaries, that the Gallic cavalry was superior to the Roman, and the German to the Gallic.
Flumen. Rhellicanus thinks the Arar (Saone) is here meant; but Achaintre, with more propriety, declares in favour of the Sequana.
Cotus. Compare chapter 33.—Proximis comitiis. “ At the last election.” Caesar speaks here more Romano.
] 75	1*	same	order as.”
Alesiam. This is the true form of the name. (Consult Vossius, ad VeU. Paterc. 2, 47, and Ursinus, in loc.) Paterculus has Alexia, and the Greek paraphrast the same, 'A\t$a, together with some early editions. For the derivation of the name, according to the Greek writers, consult Geographical Iudex.
Tribus millibus. Julius Celsus says ten thousand : “ Inlet eundum decem millibus hostium obtruncatis.”
Quo maxime confidebant. We have followed here the reading of Achaintre, from one of his best MSS. It is far simpler and more elegant than the common lection, qua maxime parte exercituiNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOJfc
confidebant. The words parte exercitus are evidently a mere in- ]75 tcrpolation.
Duo flumina. The Lutosa and Osera, now the Loze and Lozerain.
Colles. Seven or eight in number, according to Achaintre.
Maceriam. “ A stone wall.” By maceria is here meant a wall of stones, piled one upon the other without cement, or, as the Romans expressed it, made sicco lapide.
Ejus munitionis. Referring to the Roman lines of circumvallation, consisting of a rampart and ditch.
Castella. “ Redoubts.” Compare Guischard, Memoire*,
&c., vol. iv., p. 137.— Quibus in castellis. A phraseology of no unfrequent occurrence in Caesar. Compare note 7, page 5.—Star Hones disponebantur. “ Guards were placed.”
Excubitoribus. “By watches.”
Opere instituto. “The work having been begun,” i. e., while the work of circumvallation was in hands.—Intermissam collibus. “ Being free from hills.” Equivalent to colie non tectam.
The plain lay between hills on every side.	,
Atque angustioribus, &c. “And, only the narrower gates J70 Having been left open, are crowded together in them.” Vossius recommends that relictis be expunged ; and, if this could be done,
the sentence would certainly be benefited by it; but all the MSS. have the word in question. Oudendorp therefore explains it, by supposing that the larger gates of the town had been obstructed or blocked up by the ditch and stone wall (maceria), and that only the narrow gates were left by which they could enter.
Veniri ad se confestim. “ That the enemy were coming that very instant against them.” This mistake arose from the legions having been ordered to advance a little, which the Gauls took for a demonstration against the works.
Dimittere. For dimittendi.
Ratione inita, &c.	“	That,	having	made	a	computation,	he
had a short allowance of com for thirty days, but that, by economy, be might hold out a little longer.” More literally, “ that he had scantily the com of thirty days.”
Intermissum. “ Were intermitted,” i. e., where a space was vet free from our works, the line of circumvallation not having at *et been carried so far.
Pedum viginti. “ Of twenty feet m width.”—Directis laterir ms. “ With perpendi* liar sides.”—Ut ejus fossa, &c. “ So that
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK,
rag*.
J7g the bottom of this ditch might extend as far, as the brinks were
apart at top,11 i. e., so that the breadth at the bottom might be equal to that at the top.
Reliquas omnes, &c.	“	All	his	other	works he executed four
hundred feet back from that ditch.” Literally, “he drew back.” We have recalled with A chain tr* the reading of all the MSS. and best editions, namely, pedes instead of passus. Guischard first sug gcsted passus, and this is also given by De Crissd and Oberlinus. Achaintre’s argument against passus is conclusive. If the distance be 400 paces, and the whole circuit of the works only 11,000 paces, the ditch would have to be so near the city, as hardly to leave Vercingetorix room for his camp.
J /8 L Nee facile totum opus, &c. “Nor could the whole work
be easily manned with soldiers.”
Operi destinatos. “ While occupied on the works.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, rd epyov e^ovrag.
Hoc intermisso spatio. Alluding to tho four hundred feet, the space between the ditch and the other works.
Post eas. Behind the two fifleen-feet-ditcbes just mentioned, or, including the outermost one, of twenty foot, behind the three ditches.—Loricam pinnasque. “ A parapet and battlements.”
Grandibus cervis, &c.	“	Large	stakes,	cut in the form o.
stags1 horns, projecting out at the junction of the parapet and rampart, to retard the ascent of the enemy,” i. e., to prevent tho enemy from quickly scaling the works. These stakes projected horizontally.—Pluteorum. Referring to the lorica and pinna combined.
Turres. Fixed towers. They must, besides, not be confound ed with the redoubts mentioned in a previous chapter.
Materiari. “ To procure timber for the rampart,” i. e., tc fell timber in the adjacent forests, and drag it thence to the camp.
Deminutis nostris copiis. “ Our troops being, in consequence of this, reduced in number.”
Abscisis. Some have abscissis, but the most ancient MSS., as well of C«sar as of other authors, do not double the sibilant. Compare Vossius, Anal. 3, 26, p. 97.
Atque horum, &c.	“	And	the	ends	of	these being stripped
of their bark and sharpened into a point.” The common reading is dolabratis, “ being lopped off with axes.” The Roman writers, however, do not say dolabrare, but dolare ; and, besides, the best MSS. give delibratis, which harmonizes with the hro^hag of tho
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Pago.
Greek paraphrase. We have given the latter form, therefore, ]78 with Oudendorp and the best editors.
Perpetua fossa. “A continued trench.” The Latin expression conveys the idea of a number of trenches united together and forming one continued trench. Hence the distributive numeral quinos is employed, as referring separately to each of these supposed trenches, though, in fact, there is but one trench; and hence, in translating quinos pedes alta, we must say, in our idiom, “ everywhere five feet deep.” The distinction between these perpelua fossa and the scrobes mentioned a little after, is well pointed out by a modem writer, Berlinghieri, in his work on Alesia, published at Lucca, in 1812 : “ Scrobes sont aussi des fqssis, mats coniques ou cylindnqucs, au lieu que le perpetuae fossae est une fosse longitudinale ou un parallelipipede ; par exemple, supposons que, dans une ligne de vingt pieds, il y cut dix trous cylindriques, d'un pied de diametre chaque, Us auraient entr’ eux neuf intervalles d'un pied chaque. Tappellerais d'abord ces trous scrobes, mais si j'enlevais le terrain qui forme les neuf intervalles, en kablissant une communication entre les dix trous, j'aurais fait un fosse que f appellerais fossa perpetua,” p. 86.
Huc illi stipites, &c.	“	These	stakes	being sunk into this
trench and fastened at the bottom, to prevent their being pulled out, projected above the level of the ground with their branches merely.”
By the stipites are meant the trunks of trees and large branches just mentioned, and the rami are the smaller boughs at the extremities of these, or at the place where boughs begin to grow. Compare the explanation of Morus: “ Ab ramis eminebant, ea parte tenus, qua rami enati erant, tegebantur; ab ea inde parte eminebant.”
Quo qui intraverant, &c.	“	And	they	who entered within
those impaled themselves on exceedingly sharp stakes.” We have here an imitation of the Greek idiom. Compare Xenophon, Cyrop.
6, 40, iva fa o<p6&pa Qtvyiiv avrbg lavrbv iputlirruv fatdv.
Hos cippos appellabant. “ These the soldiers called cippi.” Cippus properly means a trunk of a tree standing erect, and hence in one of the old glossaries it is explained by the Greek Koppbg. It then denotes a little square pillar placed over graves, with the name,
&c\, of the deceased engraved on it, and also a landmark, or boundary stone for fields. Achaintre, taking this last meaning for his guide, thinks that the Roman soldiers called the stakes in question cippi, because they served as so many limits to the enemy’s progress. This is rather too fanciful. They would appear, on theNOTE8 ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Page.
178 contrary» to have derived their name from their general reseu blance to erect trunks of trees.
Quincuncem. The form of the quincunx was as follows .
Scrobes. “Pits.?’ Compare remarks under note 11.—
Paulaiim angustiore, &c.	41	With a depth gradually narrowing
towards the bottom.” Fastigium denotes depth as well as height. Compare Virgil {Georg. 2, 288), “ Forsitan et scrobibus qua. sint fastigia quaras.” Where see Heyne, and consult Gesner's Lexicon Rusticum, s. v. appended to his edition of the Script. Rex Rust.
Simul confirmandi, &c.	44	At	the same time, for the pur
pose of giving strength and stability, one foot from the bottom in each was filled with trampled clay.” Compare the explanation of Lipsius {PoHorcet. 2, dial. 2, p. 518), 44 Sententia est, e tribus illis pedibus altitudinis, tertium ab imo deperisse; terra aggesta ad stabiliendum stipitem, et circa eum stipata et exculcata.”
Id ex similitudine, &c.	44 This they called a lily, from its
resemblance to that flower.” The pit resembled the calyx of the lily, and the inserted stake the pistil that projects from it.
|79	1. TaU<t. 44 Stakes.”—Ferreis hamis infixis. 44 With iron
hooks fastened in them.”—Omnibus locis. Referring to the space between the 20 feet ditch and the one 400 feet distant.
Regiones secutus, &c.	44	Having followed the course of the
country, as evenly as the nature of the ground admitted, and having enclosed a space of fourteen miles, he constructed fortifications of the same kind in every respect, opposite to these, against an external foe.” Diversas is well expressed by the ear barrio of the Greek paraphrase. Oberlinus thinks that pares ejusdem generis savours of a pleonasm, but quite unnecessarily. It is equivalent to similes et simili modo factas, or, as we have rendered it, 44 of the same kind in every respect.”
Ejus discessu. There is evidently some error of the text here, and ejus has arisen out of some corruption or abbreviation of equitatus. For the reference is undoubtedly to the departure of the Gallic horse, mentioned in chapter 71, and the consequent danger of a large army’s being brought against the fortifications from without. All we can do is to translate ejus discessu, 44 in consequence of the departure of the foe,” making ejus refer to tne latter, andNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Pag&
understanding by “ the foe,” the cavalry that had left Alesia. J 79 $jus cannot in any way apply to Caesar, as some would insist.
Neu egredi cogantur. The common text has erroneously cogerentur.—Convectum. 44 Brought together,” i. e., collected within the Roman works.
Principum. 44 Of the leading chieftains.”
Frumentandi rationem habere.	“ To have any means for a
regular supply of com.” Compare the Greek paraphrase, pits Uav*)v vpovofi^v fynp ivvaivro.
Aulercis Brannovicibus. The ordinary text has Brannoviis following after Brannovicibus, but it has evidently arisen from some various readings of this latter name. Oberlinus and Daehne enclose it within brackets. We have rejected it from the text.
Lemovices. This reading is extremely doubtful. Consult Geographical Index.
Hujus opera, &c.	44	Caesar	had, as wo have before shown, j 8Q
availed himself of the faithful and valuable co-operation of this Commius in Britain.” Compare chapter 21, book 4.
Civitatem ejus. The Atrebates.—Immunem. 44 Free from taxes.” The reference is to imposts of every kind.
Jura legesquet &c.	44	Had	restored	its	ancient	rights and
privileges, and had conferred on Commius himself the country of the Morini.”
Hac in Aeduorum, &c. 14 These were reviewed in the country of the Aedui, and their number was taken down.” Literally, “ and an enumeration was entered into.” The pronoun hac refers to millia understood.
6. Ancipiti pralio. 44 In an engagement pressing on both the front and rear.” The front of the Romans would be attacked by Vercingetorix from the town, the rear by the confederate Gauls from without.
Foris. 44 Without,” i. e., on the outside Of the lines of coo travallation.
Praterita die. Compare chapter 71.
Nam apud me, &c.	44	For	honour	has	a	powerful	influence ] $ |
over me.”
Millibus octoginta. This was the amount of the force which Vercingetorix had with him in the town. Compare chapter 71.
Exspoliare. 44 Utterly to deprive.” Equivalent to penitus spoliare. The common text has spoliare, the reading which we give is Ondendorp's
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
r«i®.
Nec. We have here with the nolite that precedes a double
negative in imitation of the Greeks, unless we prefer understanding velitis after nec. But this last is not so elegant. Compare Terence, Andr. 1, 2, 35, “ Neque tu haud dicas tibi non pradic- /um,” and consult the other instances adduced by Vechner, Hel- lenolex. p. 381.
Animi causa. “For mere amusement.” Compare the Greek paraphrase : ij r/pxpeug o<psri Kki
Illorum. Referring to the confederate Gauls without, who were coming to the relief of Alesia.—Eorum. Referring to the same.
Eorum corporibus, &c. They killed the children and those who were old and infirm, and subsisted on their flesh.
Si. “Even if.”—Institui. “For one to be now established.”
Nam quid illi, &c.	“	For	what	had	that	war like this which
is now waged against us V’ i. e., what were the miseries we then endured to these under which we are now'suffering 1 Compare Morus, ad loc.
Depopulata Gallia. The verb depopulari, though regarded as a deponent, is, in fact, a common verb. Or rather, strictlv speaking, the active, passive, and middle voices are all in use; for Valerius Flaccus, 6, 531, has “ depopulare greges,” and the author of the Commentaries on the Spanish War (c. 42), has “ depopulavit .” Compare note 4, page 171.
i Securibus. Referring to the lictors and axes of the Roman
magistrates. Compare Brant, ad loc.
Prius experiantur, &c. They resolve to have recourse to the horrid expedient recommended by Critognatus, only after having tried everything else.
Recipi prohibebat. According to Dio Cassius (40, 40), the
whole of this miserable multitude perished with hunger in the space between the town and Roman camp! teal of pb oB-nog h np yha rifg xdXewg kal ro9 <rrparoxiiov,	faiptsv cipag bt^ofiivwv, oUrpirara
ixdXovro.
Planitiem. Compare chapter 69.
Abductas. One of the MSS. gives adductas, from which Ou- dendorp conjectured abductas, which we have received into the text. Oberlin retains abditas, the reading of the common editions, but explains it by sejunctas. The verb abdo certainly has on some occasions the meaning of removeo (compare TibuU. 2, 1, 82, and Gronov de pec. vet. 4, 8), but always with more or less of conceal-
%
Digitized byNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Page.
ment accompanying the act. Now there was no concealment |{}2 whatever in the present case, since it is stated, in the next chapter, that the infantry on the higher grounds were spectators of the battle with the cavalry, and cheered their countrymen witlt their cries.
Ad utramque partem. “ On both sides,” i. e., on the line of :ircumvallation, against the beseiged, and on that of contravallation against the foe without.
Proventum. The reading of the best MSS. The common text has eventum, which appears to be a mere gloss.
Raros. “ Here and there.”
Pugnee superiores. The reading of the best MSS., and J83 much more elegant than pugna superiores, which is given in the common text. Compare the expressions acer animi, disciplines clarus, &c.
Et ii qui, &c. Referring to the Gallic infantry, who beheld the equestrian conflict from the neighbouring heights. Compare note 5, page 182.
. 3. Confertis turmis. " In a compact body,” i. e., with the several turma, or troops of horse, united into one. Compare the explanation of Achaintre: “ Sur un seal front, sans intervallet
Harpagonum. “ Grappling hooks.” A species of mural- hooks attached to long poles, and used to pull down the rampart,
<Stc.
5 Campestres munitiones. Those described in chapter 74, which had been erected against the Gauls from without.
6. Libralibus. “ Large stones.” Supply 8axis. The reference is to large stones thrown by the hand. So the Greek paraphrase has }ttydXots rt Xldots. This species of missile is mentioned by Vegetius (2, 3), “ Sed et manu sola omnes milites meditabantur libralia saxa jactaret The soldiers who threw them were called libratores. Compare Tacitus, Ann. 2, 20, “ Funditores libratoresque excutere tela et proturbare hostem jubet;” and also Ann. 13, 39,
“ Libratoribus funditoribusque attributus locus, unde eminus glandes torquerentt By the Greeks they were called XtffoSdXoi. Compare Thucyd. 6, 69. Oudendorp and many others read librilibus, and refer in support of this lection to Festus, who explains librilia as follows: “ Librilia appellabantur instrumenta bellica, eaxa scilicet ad brachii crassitudinem, in modum flagellorum loris revinctat From this description, the librilia would appear to have been large sumes, attached to a thong or strap, which were drawn bock after
Pr
Digitized by GoogleMOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
having been hurled at the foe; and so Lipsius regards them:
“ Videtur emissum telum fuisse, et reductum. (Foliarcet. 4, dial.
p. 602.) Now it can hardly be supposed, that such weapons as these could have been used on the present occasion, when the Gauls were as yet at a distance; and Lipsius himself appears to favour this view of the subject: “ In Festi librilibus horto; nam in Casaris verbis longinquum non propinquum est telum." Libralibus, therefore, is evidently the true reading, not librilibus.
Glandibus. “ Bullets.” These were of lead, and of different shapes, some round, some trilateral, some oblong, dtc. Consult Lipsius, Poliorcet. 4, dial. 3, p. 604, where delineations of them are given.
Ulterioribus castellis. Referring to the redoubts that were more remote from the immediate points of attack.
Plus proficiebant. “ They did more execution.”
1 Pilis muralibus. “ By the mural javelins.” These were
heavy iron javelins discharged from the ramparts by means of engines.
Appeteret. “ Was approaching.” Some editions have appareret, but this is a mere gloss on appeteret.
Interiores. “ Those within,” i. e., the Gauls from Alesia. Compare Morus : “ Interiores, oppido inclusi"—Proferunt. u Are hearing forth from the town.”
Superiorum castrorum. 11 Of the upper camp.” This is explained immediately after.
Pane iniquo loco, &c. The situation was a disadvantageous one for the Romans, because the slope of the hill favoured the enemy, and the camp was commanded by the summit of the hill.
VtrgasUlaunum. O’Brien makes this to have been, not a proper name, but an appellation of dignity ; and derives it from the Celtic, fear-go-saighlean, i. e., “ vir ad vexillum,” or “ vexillarius,” in English “ a banneret.”
A castris. The reference is to the Gallic encampment under the walls of Alesia. Compare chapter 69.—Longurios, musculos, dtc. “ Long poles, moveable pent-houses, mural hooks/’ For an account of the musculus, and the origin of its name, consult Arche oiogical Index.
g5 1. Omnia tentantur. “Every expedient is tried.”—Pars
“ Any part of our works.”
2. Quod suum periculum, dee. “ Because they perceive, that their danger depends upon the yalour of others,” i. e., that it rests
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Page.
with others either to make them safe by a valiant resistance, or to J bring them into danger by an abandonment of their posts. In other words, their safety depended on the valour of the other legions.
Utrisque ad animum occurrit. “ The same idea presents it* self to the minds of either party.”
Si rem obtinuerint. “ If they stand their ground.” More literally, “ if they hold the affair as their own,” i. e., if they hold their own. Compare the explanation of Baron, “ Si in munitionibus restiterintand also that of Achaintre, “ In munitionibus defendendis si superiores evaserint”
Exiguum loci, &c.	“ A situation how little soever elevated,
and making a descent, is of great importance to assailants.” More literally, “ the slightest elevation of situation, added to a declivity,”
&c. Compare note 6, page 183.
 Agger, ab universis, See. “The earth, heaped up by all against our fortification.” The term agger is here employed, because the earth thus heaped up resembled a mound. Compare the Greek paraphrase : crura Si rdvrtg yfjv tig rb Spvpa IxiSdXkovatv.
Ea, qua in terram, &c. Referring to the talea, cippi, Sec —Nec jam arma, Sec. Compare the Greek paraphrase : (bars fjSv rug 'Ftapaioii teal laybg, teal SrKa iviXirov.
Deductis cohortibus, Sec. “To draw off the cohorts from the lines, and engage the enemy in a sally.” This would be, of course, a desperate expedient, and, therefore, the directions of Labienus were, not to do so unless compelled by urgent necessity; in other words, not to make a sally unless the lines were no longer tenable in that quarter.
Loca prorupta ex ascensu. “ The high uneven grounds.”
Aggere et cralibus. “ With earth and fascines.” Compare note 6.—Aditus expediunt. “ They make a ready passage for themselves.” More literally, “ they clear entrances.”
Brutum Decimus Brutus, as is thought. The Greek paraphrase has Aikiov BpoVrot.
Circumire exteriores munitiones. Polyaenus (8, 23, 11) |86 makes mention of this stratagem, but states that Caesar sent out
the troops by night, with directions to attack the rear of the enemy about the second hour of the morning. He makes, moreover, the force so sent out to have consisted of three thousand infantry and all the cavalry, SnXirag Tpb)(iXtovs «ca< rovg bcrias rdvrag.
Agger es. “The ramparts,” i. e., the earth heaped up for this purpose.—Undequadraginta. The MSS. have XXXIX. (i.
Digitized by Google434	NOTES	ON	THE	SEVENTH	BOOK.
1 3(j undequadraginta), but Ciacconius very justly suspects the text of being erroneous, since thirty-nine cohorts are too large a number altogether for “ chance to throw in the way.”
Ex colore vestitus. The Roman commanders were arrayed m a purple or crimson cloak, termed paludamentum. Compare Lipsius, Mil. Rom. 3, dial. 12, p. 107.
Cognito. After this word there follows, in the ordinary text, the words (quo insigni in praliis uti consueverat) enclosed in a parenthesis. We have rejected them from the text as a mere marginal, and, at the same time, erroneous gloss. The Roman commanders always wore the paludamentum in battle, as a matter of course, and there would be no need whatever of stating this in the text, unless, as Davies thinks, Caesar’s differed in colour from that of other generals, which is by no means likely. The clause in question is regarded as spurious by many critics, and, among others, by Morus, Brant, Lipsius, Achaintre, &c.
Ut de locis superioribus, &c.	“	Since	these	low and stooping
grounds were plainly seen from the eminences.”
Fit protinus, <kc. Turpin de Crissd very justly censures Commius for not having brought his main body into action, in which event there can be no doubt but that Caesar would have been completely defeated. The force detached under Vergasillaunus was
leaving 180,000 still under the orders of Commius. Had he attacked another part of the Roman lines with those troops, and thus kept them employed in one quarter, while Vergasillaunus was pressing them hard in another, and Vercingetorix was plying the attack within, the issue of the battle would have been widely different, and the name of Caesar would have been handed down to posterity by the side of those of Crassus and Varus. Consult Thierry, Hist, des Gaulois, vol. iii., p. 196.
Crebris subsidiis. “ By reason of the frequent aid they had been compelled to render to each other.”
187	' Vercingetorix deditur. According to Plutarch (Vit. Cats, c
27), the Gallic chieftain arrayed himself in his most splendid armour, and, having caparisoned his horse, sallied out from the gates of the town. After he had taken some circuits around Caesar, as the latter was sitting in his tribunal, he dismounted, put off his armour, and seated himself at the feet of the Roman general. Here he remained in silence, until Caesar ordered him to be taken away and reserved for his triumph. Dio Cassius (40, 41) states, that he relied on Caesar’s former friendship for forgiveness. This reliance.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES ON THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Page
however, proved unavailing, since, after having been led in tri- ] g7 umph at Rome, he was put to death in prison. (Dio Cass. 1. c.)
Per eos. By keeping this part of the prisoners from slavery, and thus making them a means of gaining over the states, to which they belonged, to their former allegiance.
Ex reliquis captivis. “ Of the remaining captives he distributed throughout the whole army one to each soldier as booty.” Literally, “ in the name of booty.”
Civitatem recipit. “ He recover* that state.”