1	1	citeriore	Gallia	:	what	region	is	meant	by	Citerior	Gallia	?
See a map of northern Italy.
ita uti: the same as ita ut, p. 16,1. 8; see vocab. supra: see the end of the first book.
Labieni: Caesar’s lieutenant was now in the country of the
Sequani. See the end of the first book and consult the map of Gallia.
Belgas: subject-accusative of coniurare and dare. As to
their situation, read Introductory Note 6, p. ix, and consult the map of Gallia, quam: whose country. We might expect quos referring to Belgas, but the relative is made to agree with the predi
HNOTES.
cate noun partem. This is common in Latin. See Tolosatium finibus, quae civitas, I, io; Vesontionem, quod est oppidum, I, 38.
has esse causas: depending on rumores adferebantur,
above.
quod vererentur: why not verebantur ? 336, 2; H. 524. Omni . . . Gallia: now that all Gaul had been subjugated.
Not, of course, including their (the Belgians’) country; strictly speaking, then, Celtic Gaul. See Bk. I, 1. pacata: the Romans, with cruel humor, called a country " pacified ” when they had enslaved it.	/
ad eos: one would expect ad se, as Caesar had said inter se in 1. 6. They are designated by the pronoun eos from Caesar’s point of view, though the thought is that of the Belgae.
9 partim qui . . . partim qui (next page) : some of whom . . . others of whom.
2 imperiis: 227, <?, 3 ; H. 385.
ab nonnullis: these constitute the third class by whom it is said the Belgae were tampered with : first, the conservative and patriotic ; second, the restless and dissatisfied ; third, the selfish and ambitious.
regna occupabantur: " what their descendants call a coup.”
Can you give an instance ?
qui: referring to potentioribus, etc.
earn rem: read again from quod through occupabantur, and you will see to what these words refer, imperio nostro: under our (i.e., Roman) rule. The ablative implies condition, and the meaning is, if we should get the sovereignty. 255, d> 4 ; H. 431, 2 (3).
duas legiones : Caesar’s whole force now in Gaul, including
auxiliaries, may have been between 50,000 and 60,000 men, a smaller force than that with which Sherman began his famous " March to the Sea.”
inita aestate : in the beginning of summer, marks the time
of deduceret.
Digitized by GOOglCNOTES.
9 interiorem Galliam: the interior of Gaul; i.e., Gaul beyond the Alps, considered with reference to Rome, qui deduceret: to lead; the antecedent of qui is Q. Pedium. What kind of a relative clause? 317 ; H. 497, I.
ipse: Caesar.
negdtium . . . uti . . . cdgndscant: the business of find
ing out.
Senonibus: look for them a little to the west of north of the Aedui, on a branch of the Sequana (Seine).
ea = eas res.
se: refers to Caesar.
certiorem faciant: compare the passive form, p. 1,1. 3.
manus cdgi: that parties of men were gathering, hi, a;
li* 465-
conduci: was mustering; a very different meaning in 1. 4, above.
dubitandum non: there should be no hesitation —he ought
not to hesitate. It was characteristic of Caesar to strike while his enemies were preparing to strike. This is not true of all the greatest commanders, but was eminently true of Alexander, Frederick the Great, and Napoleon, quin . . . proficisceretur: to march.
omni opinidne : than any one would think. 247, b ; H. 417.
Remi: look for them beyond the Matrona (Marne). Find
on the Campaign Map the city of Rheims.
Galliae: in what sense used here ?
3	1	qui dicerent: find the same kind of a relative clause in
chap. 2.
se: object of permittere; another se must be mentally supplied as subject of permittere.
neque : do not translate nor, but and that. . . not.
paratdsque: que may be translated but on the contrary.
oppidis = in oppida.
ceteris: not other, but all other ; their submission is abject.
incolant: translate as if it were incolunt; but the subjunc
tive is necessary. 336, 2 ; H. $24.
tized by GoogleNOTES.
g furirem: the politic or cowardly Remi consider the independent and determined spirit of their brother Belgae as blind passion.
Suessiones: object of deterrere, 1. 12. Look for them on the Map of Gaul, west of the Remi, between the Isara (Oise) and the Marne. Find on the Campaign Map Sois- sons.
10 qui . . . utantur : though they enjoyed. 320, e ; H. 515, III.
isdem: of tener written iisdem.
12 ipsis: the Remi. So on p. 1,1. 7, Caesar might have used ipsos in place of eos. quin . . . cQnsentirent: from uniting. Compare something in chap. 2.
his: to whom is the reference ?
quid . . . possent: what force they could bring into the
field.
reperiebat: why was not the perfect used ?
Gallos: object of expulisse.
incolerent: see note on incolant, 1. 7, above.
memoria: within the memory; two lines below, because of
the memory.
21'qua ex re = qua ex causa.
fieri: it was coming about. The Remi said fit.
spiritus . . . sumerent: compare our put on airs.
habere explorata: see vocab. 292, c; H. 388, 1, N.
3 plurimum . . . valere = plurimum posse: were the strongest. Bellovacos: look for them west of the Isara (Oise), north of Lutetia (Paris).
cSnficere: used in an uncommon sense. What is the origi
nal meaning and what the common meaning ?
electa: choice troops. sexaginta: supply milia.
Suessiones: see note on p. 3» 1. 9.
cum . . . turn: see vocab.
Britanniae: said to be the first mention of Britain by a
Roman author.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
i a obtinuerit: the English word most like a Latin word is very often not the one to express the sense of the Latin. Here render held, not obtained.
habere: what is the subject ? It is not Galliam.
Nervios: look for them on the map of Gaul, far to the
northeast, between the Sabis (Sambre) and the Scaldis (Schelde), and see on a modem map the Belgian province of Hainault.
Atrebates, etc.: all the tribes mentioned except the last four you will find on the map of Gaul between the mouths of the Sequana (Seine) and the Mosa (Moselle). The four German tribes are to the east, in the basin of the Mosa (Moselle).
arbitrari : the subject is se, referring to the Remi. What,
then, is the sum total of the force gathering against Caesar, which he had to face with probably less than 40,000 legionaries and his auxiliary troops ?
cohortatus . . . prosecutus: liberaliter means in a generous
or kindly manner; dratione indicates in what sense prd- secutus is to be taken and is equivalent to verbis, with words; finally prosecutus has its common meaning of accompany, but with the meaning unusually applied. Translate Caesar, encouraging the Remi and adding kind words.
25 obsides : as hostages, in apposition with liberos.
5 i diligenter: not diligently. See note on obtinuerit, p. 4, 1. 12.
3 rei publicae: what republic ?
communisque salutis : the common interests of the Aedui and the Romans, intersit: the real subject, represented in translation by it, is manus hostium distineri.
id fieri posse: depends on docet, 1. 2.
introduxerint: do not scruple to render as a present. The
English present is often a disguised future, or future perfect. The Roman way of speaking of two related future
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSINOTES.
events is, " This can be done, if that shall have been, or
shall be, done ours, " This can be done, if that is done.”
postquam vidit. . . cdgndvit. . . maturavit: when he saw
. . . and found out. . . (then) he hastened.
coactas . . . venire : having been assembled ... to be coming
= had assembled and were coming. neque iam . . . cdgndvit: if Caesar could have foreseen that he was writing for boys and girls of the nineteenth century, perhaps he would have mercifully written : et ab iis exploratdribus quos miserat et ab Remis cdgndvit (Belgarum cdpias) iam non longe abesse. ii flumen Axonam: the Aisne. Where ? With these words begins the apodosis (conclusion).
quae res: what is the res ?
et: correlative with the following et.
post eum quae essent: his rear.
et: connects reddebat and efficiebat. Caesar is writing
hurriedly and throws out first the word that is uppermost in his mind, commeatus, and then heaps his verbs at the end. He might have written, et efficiebat ut commeatus ab Remis reliquisque civitatibus sine periculo ad eum portari posset.
portari: down the river. Consider the situation. Caesar
was now encamped on the north, or right, bank of the river. See on the Campaign Map where his enemies were.
in altera parte : not in another party but on the other side.
in altitudinem: limiting pedum duodecim, which is a gen
itive of measure after vallo: with a rampart twelve feet in height.
duodeviginti pedum: that is, in latitudinem.
22 Bibrax: look for it north of the Axona (Aisne). Find on a modern map the department of Aisne.
24 sustentatum est: the Remi held out. What literally?
G 1 Ga 115rum, etc. : the mode of attacking towns common to the Gauls and Belgae is as follows.
3 totis moenibus: 228; H. 3S6, 2.NOTES.
moenibus . . . murum . . . murus . . . murum: Caesar’s haste in writing is often manifest, coepti sunt: observe the passive. 143 a ; H. 297, 1.
testudine facta: what the soldiers did was to lap their
shields over their heads.
quod: and this. 180,/
conicerent: 205, 1 ; H. 461, 1.
nulli: emphatic from its position. So aliud iter . . . mil
ium, I, 7; audeat nemo, I, 18; accidit nulli, II, 35. Many similar cases occur. But see A. & G., p. 389, Rem. Compare " Silver and gold have I none.”
summa nobilitate et gratia: of the highest rank and popu
larity. 251; H. 419, II.
praefuerat = qui praepositus erat et tum praeerat.
qui legati: who, as envoys. Find something similar in
chap. 5
12 sese: the subject-accusative of possef not the object of sustinere, which is used absolutely, hold out.
eo: what place is meant ?
isdem: see isdem, p. 3,1. 10, and note, isdem ducibus: the same persons as guides. usus: is the meaning having used, ox using? 290, b; II. 550, N. 1.
qui nuntii: compare qui legati, 1. io, above.
subsidio oppidanis: to aid the people in the town. What
literally ? 233, a ; H. 390.
et . . . et: we use both . . . and much less frequently than
the Romans used et . . . et; accordingly, it is better in many instances, as here, to omit in translation the first et and render the second by and also.
22 ab : best translated by an adverb, off, away.
ab milibus passuum minus dudbus: less than two miles away.
4 et. . . et: see p. 6,1. 17, and note.
5 eximiam opinionem virtutis : their extraordinary reputation for valor.
Digitized by GOOglCNOTES.
proelio . . . proeliis: a general engagement . . . skirmishes.
6 quid . . . posset: what the valor of the enemy really was. What literally? Compare quid in bello possent) p. 3, 1. 15, and note.
loco . . . opportuno = cum locus opportunus esset.
is collis: Caesar’s camp was on a hill slightly elevated
above a plain. The width of the hill, where it faced (adyersus) the enemy, was sufficient for the arrangement of his men in order of battle. On each side the hill had rapid slopes (deiectus habebat). In front the hill, sloping gently upwards (fastigatus), gradually resumed a level. After ascending a man would come to a flat again, having just ascended from the level below. — Long.
tantum . . . loci : (and) facing the enemy (adversus) extended
over as much space laterally as.
ex utraque parte lateris = ex (on) utroque latere.
ad planitiem redibat: resumed a level.
transversam: at right angles to the front.
extremas fossas : at the ends of the trenches.
18 instruxisset: not had drawn up, but should draw up. Caesar’s thought was, according to the Roman way of thinking, when I shall have drawn up, instruxero; this justifies the translation given of instruxisset, should draw up, as pointing to the future. Such a future perfect of direct speech (instruxero) becomes a pluperfect subjunctive in narration after a past tense in the principal clause, quod . . . poterant: because they were so strong in numbers.
21 si quo opus esset: if there should be need of them anywhere ; not, if there should be need of anything.
8 i subsidio duci: compare subsidio oppidanis, p. 6,1. 16, and
note,
eductas instruxerant = eduxerant et instruxerant. 292,
Rem.
si: to see if.
nostri autem, etc.: parati in armis erant ut adgrederentur
(hostis) impeditos, si ab illis initium transeundi fieret.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
Mark how fond the Latin is of putting dependent clauses before principal clauses. Attention to this will often be of great assistance in seeing the meaning.
impeditos : when they should get stuck fast.
contendebatur: there was fighting. Compare sustentatum
est, p. 5,1. 24.
10 secundiore . . . nostris: though the cavalry skirmish turned out rather favorably to our men.
13 demonstratum est: where ?
potuissent: compare instruxisset, p. 7,1. 18, and note.
popularentur: repeat before it ut from 1. 14. nobis usui: find something like this on this page.
9 2 acriter . . . pugnatum est: there was fierce fighting. Com- pare contendebatur, p. 8,1. 8. impeditos : while they were struggling.
circumventos interfecerunt: compare eductas instruxe
rant, p. 8,1. 3, and note.
hostes: the main body, not those mentioned in 1. 2. The
word is the subject of constituerunt, 1. 11. ubi: repeat mentally before viderunt and coepit.
spem is the subject and se the object of fefellisse.
neque: take the negative part with progredi, the que with
viderunt.
atque: repeat ubi.
ipsos = se, object of deficere. The Gauls were not used to long campaigns and made the natural mistake of not providing for supplies of food to be brought.
constituerunt. . . quemque reverti: a fatal mistake; it
enabled Caesar to attack them in detail, and his eagle eye failed not to see his advantage.
domum: 258, b; H. 380, II. 2,1).
et: connects reverti and convenirent, 1. 16. quorum ... ad eos: do not be confused by the relative clause coming before the antecedent. Take the clauses as they stand and the meaning will emerge; then you can translate.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
intr5duxissent: is this had introduced ? See again instrux
isset, p. 7,1. 18, and note.
convenirent: one would expect convenire to correspond to
reverti, above, but Caesar unconsciously changed the construction.
x8 Divitiacum . . . adpropinquare: read again the first half of chap. 5.
his persuaderi: depends on poterat in the next line. 230;
H. 301, 1.
neque . . . ferrent: do not translate nor bear, a wooden,
un-English rendering, but and so fail to bring.
ea re: what do these words refer to ?
secunda vigilia: the time from sunset till sunrise was divided into four equal watches, two before midnight and two after.
egressi: who?
3 veritus: since he feared.
6 qui . . . moraretur: find similar clauses in chaps. 2 and 3. 12 cum . . . agmine: though at the extreme rear of the enemy's line.
ad quos = ii ad quos.
ventum erat: they had come. Find other such impersonal constructions.
14 priores : while those in advance.
tantam . . . multitudinem . . . quantum . . . diei: this is awkward writing, since things are compared that are incomparable. Say, as great a number of them as the length of time allowed. A dreadful butchery 1
in finis SuessiQnum: in what direction was Caesar
marching ?
x Noviodunum: Soissons; look for it on both maps on the
south side of the Axona (Aisne).
2 oppugnare: carry by assault^—an unusual meaning. What should you expect ?
paucis defendentibus : though the defenders were few.
vineas agere: regularly used of bringing up the vineae, but
Original f
HARVARD UNNOTES.
here seemingly of getting them ready. The vineae were wooden sheds, open in front and rear, used to protect men who were working to undermine a wall or fill up a ditch before fortifications. They were about eight feet high, of the like width, and double that length, covered with raw hides to protect them from being set on fire, and moved on wheels or rollers.
magnitudine operum, etc.: Galli permdti magnitudine operum, quae, etc., et celeritate, quae: the like of which.
et . . . impetrant: and through the appeal of the Remi obtain their request that they may be spared. ut conservarentur: mark how often a dependent clause, particularly one introduced by ut, precedes the one on which it depends. Attention to this order, as it is much less common in English, will often help one to see the relation of clauses and the meaning.
14 atque : and particularly.
in deditidnem accepit: do not translate woodenly," received
in surrender,” but allowed the surrender of The phrase is significant, meaning that he would not treat them as prisoners of war, that is, kill them or sell them as slaves.
qui cum: the regular order of these two words when they
come at the beginning of a clause, but we have to reverse the order and render the relative by a personal or demonstrative pronoun and a connective.
Bratuspantium: look for it on the Campaign Map west of
the Isara (Oise).
abesset: under the government of cum, 1. 17.
12	1	sese . . . venire: that they placed themselves under his pro
tection and submitted to his power ; that is, they submitted unconditionally, neque: do not translate nor.
4 pueri: children, as homines often means men and women. passis manibus : pitiful!
8 in fide . . . fuisse : had been faithful and friendly to.NOTES.
ii redactos . . . perferre: see note on circumventos interfecerunt, p. 9,1. 6.
et ... et: see note on p. 6, 1. 17.
qui = ii qui.
eius cdnsili principes : the prime movers in this plan.
in Britanniam profugisse: " the leaders, the agitators, ran
away to Britain when the place was too hot to hold them, as the Gaul still does.” — Long.
petere: the subject-accusative is Bellovacos.
sua: his well-known.
quod si fecerit: if he should do this.
qua: 105, d\ H. 190, 1.
1 honoris . . . causa : out of regard to.
3 magna . . . auctoritate: one of great influence ; a predicate ablative of description.
6 Ambianorum: north of Bratuspantium. Observe the position of Amiens on the Campaign Map.
10 nihil pati vini: 216, a, 1; H. 397, 1. The subject-accusative of pati is eos understood, referring to the Nervii Supply the same subject for esse, two lines below, for increpitare, incusare, and confirmare.
qui . . . dedidissent . . . proiecissent: for having surren
dered and renounced. 341, d\ H. 528, 1.
cdnfirmare: stronger than dicere; to add something (con)
by way of strengthening an assertion.
Sabim: Caesar had been marching in a direction north of
east and was now on the left bank of the Sabis (Sambre).
trans id flumen: on the south side.
3 utrisque persuaserant: compare the passive construction,
p. 9,1. 19.
quique = et eos qui.
10 qui . . . deligant: find a similar construction in chaps. 2,
3* ii-
cum : since.
15 demonstrarunt: shortened form for demonstraverunt.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
inter singulas: the same mistake that one hears so often in English, " between each.” Say between each two.
17 quicquam negdti: it was a matter of no difficulty at all. What literally ? Compare nihil vini, p. 13,1. 10.
sub sarcinis: besides their arms, the Roman soldiers carried
food, utensils, and three or four stakes (valli) for the palisade of the camp.
Here is what General Sherman says in his Memoirs a soldier in our time should carry : “ Each soldier should, if not actually sick or wounded, carry his musket and equipments, containing from 40 to 60 rounds of ammunition, his shelter tent, a blanket or overcoat, and an extra pair of pants, socks, and drawers, in the form of a scarf, in lieu of knapsack, and in his haversack he should carry some bread, cooked meat, salt, and coffee.”
A mule could carry somewhat more, qua pulsa : and if this legion were routed.
futurum (esse): the result would be.
adiuvabat: the subject is the sentence following from quod.
Translate this circumstance favored the advice of those who reported the intelligence, I mean that (quod).
Nervii: subject of effecerant, sixth line of the next page.
This long sentence is not so difficult as it looks ; follow closely the Latin order to discover the sense, render quo in order that', effecerant had caused, and instar like. cum: since.
nihil. . . possent: compare quid in bello possent, p. 3, 1. 15; quid . . . virtute posset, p. 7,1. 6.
15 i neque enim: and in fact. . . not. Mark the meaning of
emm
2 quicquid: distinguish quicquid, whatever, from quicquam, any at all, p. 14, 1. 17. pedestribus valent copiis: compare virtute . . . valere, p. 4» 1* 4*
4 venissent: should come. Justify this translation. See instruxisset, p. 7,1. 18, and note.
HARVARD UNIVERNOTES.
teneris . . . enatis: by lopping and bending in trees when young and letting the branches grow out thick laterally. But you must make out the literal rendering.
interiectis: it does not appear possible to take this word
in the sense given to it in the dictionaries, thrown or stuffed in. Moberly translates, by throwing in brambles and thorns for the present occasion. But is it to be supposed that this was done everywhere ? If not, how would the Nervii know where to do it," for the present occasion ” ? Moreover, what they had done was from of old, antiquitus. Translate, therefore, by planting among them.
non modo non . . . sed ne . . . quidem: this formula is of
frequent occurrence in Latin and is usually awkwardly rendered, " not only not, but not even.” Instead, translate as if the first member were complete in itself, suppressing non modo, and begin the second member with nay, nor even : which it was not possible to pass through, nay, nor even see through.
11 quern locum : the place, I mean, which. The difficulty of understanding Caesar’s account of the battle on the Sambre is not to be compared with that of Grant’s description of the battle of Shiloh. This is not to impute any fault to our great commander, as a writer; it is due to the vast scale of his operations and to the enormous complexity of modern warfare.
ab eo flumine: he means on the other side.
pari adclivitate: of similar Upward slope, a descriptive
ablative.
passus . . . apertus: clear of woods for about two hundred
paces up from its base.
infimus = ab inferiSre parte.
ab superidre parte: in the upper part. Not seldom ab
means on, at, by, because the idea of removal (from) implies previous contact or contiguity, and the latent, or implicit, idea sometimes becomes the patent, or explicit.NOTES.
non . . . posset: one could not easily see within. Such impersonal expressions as perspici potest are common in Latin. Mark the mode of translation.
10 a aliter . . ,ac: otherwise than, ox different from. This strange idiom looks like an abridged colloquial expression, aliter ac aliter, one way and another way. The order of march was one way and the Belgae reported it another way. So I have heard a child say, ” This is different and that is different,” meaning w This is different from that.”
6 conlocarat: for the form compare demonstrarunt, p. 14, 1. 15, and note. Do not confound conloco, plate, with conligo, collect.
12 neque, etc.: and while our me A dared not pursue them as they retreated (cedentis), longius: with insequi, quem ad finem = ad finem ad quem.
interim: may be omitted in translating.
opere dimenso: the first thing to do in laying out a camp.
19 sese confirmaverant: had encouraged each other to do.
17	1	iam: students are commonly content to render, this wTord
now or already; but it does not mean now as nunc does ; it always looks backward or forward. When now is the proper rendering, as here, iam marks the end of a period of time, or the last of a series of events; in the sense of already, it suggests time or events to follow. However it is translated, its fundamental meanings are either so soon, or at last. in manibus nostris: close upon us.
vexillum: probably red.
cum . . . oporteret: for running to arms. What literally ?
What like the use of the passive infinitive concurri to be found in chap. 18 ?
signum tuba dandum: in order to call the men to take
their places in the ranks, some might not see the flag.
qui, etc. : (ii) arcessendi (sunt) qui. . . processerant.
signum dandum: signum proeli committendi dandum est.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
his difficultatibus: in this strait; but these words, as well
as subsidio, are in the dative. Find two other instances of double dative.
quid fieri oporteret: the object of praescribere, ipsi: without orders.
2 quam in partem: in whatever direction.
neu perturbarentur animo: and not lose presence of mind.
quod . . . aberant: the reason of the following, not the
preceding clause. Another instance of the dependent preceding the principal clause. So quam . . . decucurrit, 1. 2, above. Compare p. n, 1. 12, and second note.
quo . . . posset: a javelin cast. What literally?
9 temporis: mark how the important word comes first. Take this sentence mentally in the Latin order, and see how quickly the meaning appears.
quam ... in partem: compare the second line above.
quaeque = et quae, not from quisque.
19 cum: since, governs resisterent and impediretur.
1	aliae alia in parte: some legions in one party others in
another. Literally, other legions in another part; a singular idiom. The singularity consists in the fact that only half the thought is expressed, and that the second half. " Other legions in another part ” implies " some legions in one part.” So altero pede claudus, " lame in the other foot,” is the Latin way of saying " lame in one foot,” implying a sound foot not mentioned.
neque certa subsidia: here begins the statement of the
result; subsidia, the subject of poterant, conlocari: depends, like the following infinitives, on poterant.
neque quid (poterat) : nor was it possible to foresee what
would be needed everywhere.
milites: subject of compulerunt.
acie: an old form of the genitive for aciei.
10 Atrebates . . . compulerunt: Atrebates (acc.) exanimatos cursu et lassitudine yolneribusque cbnfectos compulerunt.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
his: against these, i.e., legionis ndnae et decimae mili
tibus.
ea pars: ea hostium pars.
conantis: when they attempted to cross.
impeditam: Le., fluminis transitu impeditam.
15 hostis: the object of cdniecerunt.
proeliabantur: kept up the fight; observe the force of the
im perfect, a fronte: see note on p. 15,1. 16.
nudatis castris: as the camp was left unguarded, gives the
reason of contenderunt, p. 20,1. 1.
2 summum castrorum locum: not the highest part of the
campy but the height occupied by the camp. Castrbrum is a possessive genitive.
5 quos : and who ; quos does not refer to iis.
7 adversis . . . occurrebant: came straight against the enemy. What literally ?
praecipites . . . mandabant: took to headlong flight. What
literally ?
eorum: by taking the words as they stand through orieba
tur, you will see what ebrum limits.
alii aliam: compare aliae alia, p. 19,1. 1, and note.
equites Treveri: subject of contenderunt, 1. 21.
auxili causa : as auxiliaries.
cum . . . vidissent (1. 20): seeing. So above, 1. 10, cum re
spexissent, on looking back.
compleri: this and the following infinitives depend upon
vidissent.
1 pulsos = pulsos esse. So superatos.
hostis: subject-accusative of potitos (esse).
Caesar: subject of prdcessit, 1. 18, below, from which it is
separated by 118 words. Take the sentence in the order of the words, and the meaning will be clear. To translate is not easy. In translating, repeat and saw before quartae cohortes, 1. 6, and render the ablative absolutes by clauses, thus: and saw that all the captains of the fourth cohort
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITNOTES.
were killed. Then reliquos esse tardiores, that the rest in consequence were losing heart.
4 urgeri: depends on vidit.
signis . . . conlatis: and since the standards were brought together.
11 iam . . . non: now at last. . . not = no longer.
hostis . . . subeuntis intermittere: that the enemy did not
cease coming up the hill.
ab: on; in 1. 12, above, in or on.
cuius: separated from its antecedent by 136 words.
22	1	etiam	.	. . rebus: and likewise in the utmost personal dan-
ger.
5 ut . . . coniungerent: for the (two) legions gradually to draw together.
conversa . . . inferrent: to face about and charge. But what literally ? By this movement the soldiers formed an orbis, or rectangle, presenting a front to the enemy everywhere. So did a company of fifty-one men in the battle of Beecher's Island, in 1867, when surrounded by a thousand Indians.
7 aversi: fro?n their rear being unguarded; literally, being turned away.
11 cursu incitato: broke into a run. What literally ?
qui: refers to what ? What is the grammatical irregularity ? quo in loco res esset: what the situation was.
17 nihil . . . reliqui fecerunt: left nothing undone in the way of speed. 216; H. 396, IV. ad celeritatem = celeritate.
20 volneribus confecti: badly wounded. What literally?
22 perterritos = perterritos esse: the subject-accusative is hostis.
etiam inermes : even though unarmed.
23 1 occurrerent . . . praeferrent: result clauses depending on tanta est facta.
3 in extrema spe : though all hope of saving themselves was at
an end. A literal translation would be meaningless, orNOTES.
would convey a wrong idea. Compare p. 22,1. 1. In has not exactly the same meaning in the two places.
5 proximi . . . insisterent: those nearest would stand upon their prostrate companions.
qni superessent = ii qui superessent, the survivors. Cf.
iis qni emerant = emptSribus, p. 28,1. 3.
intercepta remitterent: would catch and hurl back. Com
pare eductas instruxerant, p. 8,1. 3, and note.
homines : subject-accusative of ausos esse. -
indicari deberet: one ought to judge. Compare perspici posset, p. 15,1. 17, and second note on 1. 16.
facilia: predicate adjective after redegerat.
ex difficillimis: most difficult in themselves. This chapter
is remarkable for the omission of conjunctions; ut is to be understood three times: before tum, equites, and his deiectis; et before ascendere and subire. Read aloud the Latin and mark how weakening the effect would be of expressing these conjunctions, and how offensive to the ear.
aestuaria: see p. ix.
cum . . . arbitrarentur: thinking there was no obstacle to
the victors, no safety for the vanquished. What literally ?
18 omnium: order, cdnsensu omnium.
24 3 ut. . . videretur : that it might be seen that he showed; not, " that he might seem.”
7 supra: where ? cum: while ; four lines below it means though.
unum oppidum: what town is unknown; it is conjectured
that it was situated at the junction of the Sambre and the Meuse.
ex . . . partibus: simply, all around.
16 conlocabant: there is a reading conlocarant. If that is the true reading, turn in the preceding line would mean besides.
18 iis impedimentis: with depositis.
igitized by GoogleNOTES.
agere ac portare: we should say drive or carry. From
these words it is apparent that impedimentis here means luggage and animals.
custddiam . . . praesidium: a guard for the impedimenta,
and a garrison of fighting men to hold the place.
25 i obitum: usually of the death of a person.
cum alias, etc.: since they carried on now aggressive, now
defensive, war. What literally ?
hunc . . . locum: the country between the Meuse and the
Scheldt, not merely the stronghold.
5 primo adventu = cum primum advenisset, as soon as our army had got there.
vallo pedum duodecim: that is, in altitudinem, which is
expressed in p. 5,1. 19.
quindecim milium: it is doubtful whether pedum or pas
suum is understood. About what would be the difference in distance ?
vineis actis: compare p. 11,1. 5, and note.
aggere exstructo: an embankment of timber, stones, and earth, wide enough to roll one or more towers upon, was begun at a distance from the wall of a town and was carried forward by soldiers working under shelter of the vineae, up to the defensive w’orks.
inridere . . . increpitare: 275; H. 536,1.
tanta machinatio: story on story was added to the turris,
as the besieged increased the height of their defences, as often happened, so that those in the top story might be on a level with the top of the ramparts.
ab tanto spatio : so far away. Compare ab milibus, p. 6,
1. 22, and note.
quibusnam manibus: with what hands, pray ? nam, added for emphasis, points their sarcasm.
hominibus . . . contemptui: the Italians of the present day
do not strike one as conspicuously shorter than the Germans.
magnitudine = altitudine.
itizedby GOOgleNOTES.
16 conlocare: strangely used for conlocaturos esse. The Aduatuci may have thought the Romans intended to hoist the tower upon the wall, or they may have been joking. Which is more probable ?
18 moveri: moving; supply as subject-accusative turrim.
26 3 qui. . . possent: compare qui . . . dedissent, p. 13, 1. 14, and note.
se suaque: another se is to be supplied as subject-accusative
of permittere.
unum: which was ne . . . despoliaret.
dementia ac mansuetudine: of these qualities the Aduatjuci
soon had an illustration in their own case, when he sold 53,000 of them as slaves.
statuisset: not "had decided,” but "should decide.” Com
pare instruxisset, p. 7,1. 18, and note.
10 traditis armis = si arma tradidissent, should deliver up their arms.
sibi praestare: it was better for them ; praestare is used impersonally.
ab his = ab his finitimis.
consuessent: 128, a; H. 235.
cSnsuetudine: ablative of cause.
aries: "a long, strong beam of wood furnished with an iron head in the form of a ram’s head. It was suspended from a framework by a strong chain or ropes, and worked by men who drove it against the wall.” si. . . dedidissent: order, si dedidissent prius quam aries. On the mode of translating these pluperfect subjunctives, see note on statuisset, 1. 7, above, and that on instruxisset.
in Nerviis: in the case of the Nervii, a common meaning
of in with names of persons in the ablative.
ne quam . . . inferrent: not to do any harm to those who had
surrendered to the Roman people.
quae . . . dixerunt: they said they were ready to obey his
orders. What literally ?
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSINOTES.
2i facere: what is to be supplied as subject-accusative? What is strange about facere ? What should you expect ?
i summam . . . adaequarent: came almost up to the very top.
What literally ?
4 pace sunt usi: is this equivalent to conquieverunt, they kept quiet, or is the meaning, they were unmolested ? g denique : has the word its usual meaning here ?
partim . . . partim: some . .. others; compare p. i, 1. 8,
and p. 2,1. i. iis: with armis.
eo concursum est: the soldiers hurried thither. Find similar
constructions in chaps. 6, 9, 10, 11.
ut a viris . . . debuit: as brave men ought to fight.
in extrema spe salutis: compare p. 23, 1. 3, and note.
The meaning is not, however, the same here. Translate as the last hope of saving themselves.
1	iam: compare p. 17,1. 1, and note.
iis qui emerant = emptoribus. Compare qui superessent
= ii qui superessent, the survivors, p. 23, 1. 7. These emptores were the mercatores traders, who followed the army, as hungry sharks follow a ship, capitum: what do we say instead of heads ?
quinquaginta trium: compare note on p. 26, 1. 6. They
were probably driven in chain-gangs to the Province or to Italy and sold in lots to suit purchasers, there to end their lives in bondage. A dreadful fate 1 6 Venetos, etc. : look for them on the map of Gaul, between the Liger (Loire) and the Sequana (Seine). Find on a modern map the limits of Brittany.
9 in dicibnem : under the sway ; in some texts in deditionem. If that reading is correct, the meaning would be, were brought to surrender.
pacata: compare p. 1,1. 7, and note.
13 incolerent: the subjunctive, because in a clause dependent on another with the subjunctive. Find the Grammar rule.
Digitized by GoOglC14 qui . . . pollicerentur: find the same construction in chaps. 2, 11, 17.
x6 inita . . . aestate: compare p. 2,1. 8.
17 Carnutes, etc.: look along the Loire. Caesar’s forces were posted so as to prevent concerted action between the Gauls on the two sides of the Loire.
29 1 Italiam: what Caesar calls in chap. 1 Citerior Gallia, a part of Italy geographically, but not politically.