omnis, except the Roman province, the Allobroges, and Gallia Cisalpina. See Vocabulary. Gaul as a whole.
aliam, another.
 tertiam, qui—appellantur, (those inhabit) the third, who in their own language are called Celts ; in ours, Gauls. The full expression would be, (ii) qui appellantur Celtae ipsorum lingua, Galli nostra (lingua, incolunt) tertiam (partem).
hi omnes, all of these. omnes is never used with partitive genitive except by poets and late writers.
lingua, institutis, legibus. Observe the Latin usage in regard to the conjunction. The conjunction is either omitted entirely, as here, or connects each individual word; e.g. lingua et institutis et legibus.
inter se, from one another; literally, among themselves. As there is no reciprocal pronoun (each other) in Latin, its place is taken by inter se, inter vos, inter nos. Avoid the literal translation. Render always by each other with the preposition which the English idiom demands; e.g. inter se coniuncti sunt, they are hound to each other; inter se differunt, they differ from each other. This expression often takes the place of a direct object; e.g. cohortati inter se, encouraging each other.
flumen. Supply dividit. Matrona et Sequana take the singular verb dividit since the two rivers make only one boundary.
propterea quod. The correlative propterea so often joined with quod intensifies the meaning. Our English in as much as, owing to the fact that, seeing that, may serve to express this emphasis.
cultu, civilization, as shown by manner of life, humanitate, refinement,
e. mental culture.
327
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[BOOK 1«
provinciae. Its chief city was the flourishing Greek town Massilia, now
Marseilles.
minime saepe commeant, very seldom penetrate; literally, least often go back and forth.
ad effeminandos animos, toward weakening their minds.
qui trans Rhenum incolunt. The verb is here used intransitively. Compare chap. 5, Boiosque, qui trans Rhenum incoluerunt; also chap. 54, qui proximi Rhenum incolunt. Usually the verb governs a direct object; e.g. unum incolunt above.
66. 1. qua de causa, and for this reason. The relative in both English and Latin is equivalent to a conjunction and a demonstrative. The Romans, being fond of connecting their sentences like the links of a chain, often used a relative at the beginning of a sentence where in English we usually have the demonstrative alone.
quoque, also, always follows the emphatic word, because they (just as the Belgians) dwell near the Germans.
reliquos, the rest of. Observe the Latin idiom ; cf. i. 24, in colle medio, on the middle of the hill. It was not until a later period that these adjectives, becoming hardened into neuter substantives, admitted of a partitive genitive; e.g. in medio urbis (Tac. An.). The adjectival construction is the classical one; and the student must bear this in mind, especially in translating English into Latin.
fere cotidianis proeliis cum Germanis contendunt, they contend in almost daily battles with the Germans. The ablative of accompaniment regularly takes the preposition cum, both in a friendly and in a hostile sense.
ipsi (emphatic) the Helvetians themselves.
eorum refers back to hi omnes, the people being put for the country, — one part of these, which it has been said the Gauls occupy.
obtinere (pronounce optinere). Note the derivation ob + teneo, ‘to hold in spite of obstacles; ’ cf. op-pidum, note to p. 134, 1. 16. Our obtain, the English derivative of obtineo, is used to-day in an entirely different sense. The old meaning ‘ hold,’ now obsolete, is seen in the following line from Milton : “He who obtains the monarchy of heaven.” This is a good illustration of how unsafe it is to render Latin words by their English derivatives. Compare the meaning of virtute above, with that of the corresponding English word. The student should never rest satisfied until he has reached the root-meaning of every Latin word.
6 continetur, it is bounded; literally, it is held together.
ab Sequanis, on the side of the Sequani and Helvetii.
vergit ad septentriones, it tends, inclines, or slopes toward the north.
ab extremis Galliae finibus, from the extreme frontier of Gaul (i.e. Celtic Gaul).
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYa Garumna flumine. Note the different uses of the ablative in this chapter. All the varied uses of the ablative become very simple when the pupil understands how each one arose. The ablative in Latin represents three old cases, the ablative proper, the instrumental, and the locative.
Ablative Proper. The true ablative, as its name implies, is the case denoting separation. When we read suis finibus eos prohibent, we meet with a true ablative. All verbs of separation and oftentimes such adjectives as vacuus, liber, take the ablative proper.
Separation implies source. Hence the u ablative of source.” a Garumna flumine is a true ablative.
Source gives cause or motive; e.g. qua de causa Helvetii — praecedunt means that the excellence of the Helvetians came from that cause. The 44 ablative of cause ” is a historical ablative, although often the idea of instrument is strong; e.g. regni cupiditate inductus. The ablative which follows a comparative is a true ablative of separation. If we read Caesar fortior Pompeio, Caesar is braver than Pompey, the ablative means that Caesar is separated from Pom- pey by certain degrees of bravery. This same idea is expressed by such prepositions as prae, ante, etc. The prepositions with the ablative proper are a, ab, de, ex, pro, prae, sine, as well as those adverbs which later became prepositions, tenus, palam.
Instrumental. When the ablative shows association, instrument, or agent, it represents the instrumental.
The “ablative of accompaniment” is the instrumental of association; e.g. suis cum omnibus copiis exirent.
Accompaniment can show the manner and the attendant circumstances of an action ; e.g. flumen, quod — influit incredibili lenitate, flows with such wonderful smoothness, chap. 12.
Constant association may denote a characteristic; e.g. Dumnorigem, summa audacia, Dumnorix, a man of the greatest boldness. Hence the “ablative of characteristic” is the instrumental ablative.
The 44 ablatives of means” and “agent” are of course the true instrumental; e.g. continetur Garumna flumine, Oceano, finibus Belgarum.
The 44 ablative of specification ” shows the instrumental; e.g. hi omnes lingua, institutis, legibus inter se differunt; it is language, etc., that is the means of difference between them.
The 44 ablative of degree of difference ” is also instrumental; e.g. paucis ante diebus, a few days before is really before by a few days. Likewise the “ablatives of price,” 44 measure,” and “fullness ” ; e.g. 441 value a thing by so much (viginti minis) in the scale of price.”
The preposition with the instrumental ablative is properly only cum. Other prepositions, such as ab with ablative of agent, have come in by confusion.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book I
Locative. When the ablative denotes location or situation, either in space or time, it stands for the locative. Hence the 44 ablative of place,” and the 44 ablative of time ” are really locatives; e.g. qui eo tempore principatum in civitate obtinebat, chap. 3.
The prepositions with the locative ablative are in, sub, subter, super, coram.
spectat inter, etc. Translate by one compound English word all that follows spectat in this sentence.
CHAPTER 2,
14. apnd Helvetios. Note the emphatic position of Helvetios, because they are 'the people discussed in chaps. 2-29. Of them Orgetorix is singled out as the topic for chaps. 2-4 ; hence its own emphatic position, at end of the sentence. The Celtic ending rix in Orgetorix is the same as the Latin rex. Compare Dumno-rix, 4 world king,’ Bitu-riges 4 world kings.’
16. M. Messala et M. Pisone consulibus, in the consulship of Marcus Messala and Marcus Piso = 61 b.c.
civitati. This easily suggests the idea of citizens; hence the plural exirent in the dependent clause.
suis cum omnibus copiis = men, women, and children. Greek xavtiiificl.
67. 1. perfacile esse potiri, (saying) that it was very easy, since they excelled all in valor, to get dominion over the whole of Gaul. What is the subject of esse ? esse. From the object clause ut — exirent we pass to a simple statement implied in persuasit. In the former we have what he persuaded them to do; in the latter, the argument which he used to persuade them.
id hoc facilius eis persuasit, he persuaded them the more easily to this; literally, he persuaded this to them,—hoc, ablative of cause, referring to the clause beginning with quod. So in English *the more easily,’ the is an instrumental case of our Anglo-Saxon pronoun se. Hence the literal meaning is 4 by that more easily,’ an expression which corresponds to the Latin hoc facilius.
loci natura Helvetii continentur, are confined by the character of the country.
latissimo. Note that the superlative denotes a high degree of comparison, very wide.
flumine Rheno, qui. The relative is in agreement with Rheno.
7. his rebus fiebat, from these circumstances it happened. The subject of fiebat is the clause ut possent, fiebat, imperfect, because the causes were constantly at work to bring about the following result.
homines bellandi cupidi, they {being) men eager for war.
pro multitudine, considering the number of inhabitants; literally, inNOTES.
proportion to. Compare chap. 29, where the estimate of the Helvetians is given.
angustos, too narrow with force of a comparative. Compare vi. 8, longum esse perterritis Romanis Germanorum auxilium exspectare.
milia passuum. The passus was 4 feet 10 inches; hence a thousand paces or the Roman mile was 4,854 feet. How many feet less than our mile V The English word ‘ mile ’ is derived from this expression, the passuum having dropped out.
CHAPTER 3,
his rebus adducti, induced by these considerations, adducti — permoti, etc. The student should always feel the force of the preposition in compound verbs.
comparare — confirmare, infinitives after constituerunt, to buy as great a number as possible of beasts of burden and wagons, to make as extensive sowings as possible ... to establish peace and friendship with the neighboring clans.
3. bi tertium annum, etc., they fix their departure by decree for the third year.
is — suscepit, he took on himself the embassy.
ad civitates, to the clans. (See Introduction, 56, 63, 64.)
amicus. Distinguished honor given by the Roman Senate.
ut — occuparet. A secondary tense, because persuadet is historical present.
Dumnorigi, composed of dumno (for dub-no, world) and rix, king (Latin rex).
ut idem conaretur, to attempt the same.
perfacile factu esse — perficere, (he proves to them) that to accomplish their attempts was a very easy thing to do. The student meets for the first time the so-called supine. This term is a comparatively recent one to apply to this formation alone. In the Latin grammarians the word included both “ gerunds” and “supines.” The student should bear in mind that the supine is nothing more than a verbal noun. The work done by this can be done by verbal nouns of any declension. The cases in common use are the accusative and ablative, although the dative appears rarely.
14. non esse dubium quin, there is no doubt that, quin (a locative or instrumental of the interrogative and relative qui, with the negative ne) signified ‘why not?’ or ‘whereby.’ The interrogative stem gave the construction in expressions of doubt.
Galliae potiri, to obtain possession of Gaul. The original construction after potior was the locative, for the verb signified “to be master.” Hence potior castris would mean “ I am master in the camp.” The ablative is nothing more than the locative ablative. In old Latin the genitive often followed ex-
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY





































NOTES,
14. oppida sua omnia. The oppida are strongholds, while the vici are groups of houses, vicus is the word for the street of a city, referring to the rows of houses on either side. English towns in wick and wich, e.g. Warwick, ‘garrison town,’ Norwich, ‘ north village,” perpetuate the Latin vicus.
numero, ablative of specification.
70. 1. ad duodecim. See note to p. 69, 1. 5, ad milia.
reliqua aedificia. See note to p. 00,1.1, reliquos Gallos.
incendunt, set fire to. comburunt, burn.
domum reditionis, hope of a return home. domum is the accusative of limit of motion after the verbal noun reditionis. These nouns in tio in early Latin governed a direct object through the influence of a verbal notion ; manus (probably accusative) iniectio esto, let there be a laying on of hands. (Laws of Twelve Tables, III.) The “gerund” and “supine” are simple verbal nouns. There is no difference between reditionis spe and redeundi spe.
uti, old form for ut. The syncope of the final syllable e (i) was the result of the old law of accentuation in Latin, which required every word to be accented on the first syllable. So we find quin for quine, nec for neque, ac for atque, tot for toti. In prepositions we find ambi reduced to am-, endo, indu, to ind-, in- in compounds, ut (uti) is undoubtedly an interrogative and relative conjunction (perhaps for quoti), how ? whereby. The interrogative is seen in such expressions as ut vales, how do you do? The use of ut in clauses of purpose and result was derived from the relative, e.g. venit ut videret, he came to see is he came whereby (i.e. by act of his coming) he might see.
exustis. The Latin language was deficient in a perfect active participle. The means employed to compensate for this part of the verb are : (1) The perfect participle of a deponent verb; e.g. eodem usi consilio. (2) The ablative absolute, as here. (3) A temporal clause.
cum iis. secum would more properly be used, referring to the subject of principal clause, but iis avoids all ambiguity.
Boios. This tribe gave its name to the modern Bohemia and Bavaria. (See Vocabulary.) Of what is this word the object, and what words limit it ?
CHAPTER 6,
omnino, in all. quibus itineribus, by which ways. The antecedent is repeated for the sake of clearness. What part of speech is quibus ?
nmim and alterum are in partitive apposition with itinera.
vix qua. Note emphatic position of vix. It was icith difficulty that here. singuli carri, wagons one by one, in single file.
ducerentur. Relative clause of characteristic, the relative adverb qua being equivalent to the conjunction ut and the demonstrative adverb ibi; cf.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYnote on qua de causa, p. 66, 1.1. The locality is Pas de 1’lScluse, about eighteen miles below Geneva. The railroad from Paris to Geneva, via M&con, runs here.
Allobrogum. They had been subdued by C. Pomptinus, 61 b.c. (See Vocabulary.) The name Allobrox contains the Gallic brog, 4land,’ 1 region.’
locis, locative ablative, loco, parte, rare, with an adjective express place by the locative ablative.
transitur = transiri potest, it can be crossed by means of a ford.
2. Allobrogibus — viderentur, vel — paterentur. Indirect discourse after existimabant. Observe the omission of the object after coacturos. Compare vii. 81, dat tuba signum suis atque ex oppido educit, v. 17, nostri, in eos impetu facto, repulerunt.
persuasuros. The student will note that esse in the future infinitive is generally omitted.
l?ono animo, of a friendly mind, i.e. well disposed.
eos for se might be confused with the subject of paterentur.
a. d. v. Kal. Apr., = die quinto ante Kalendas Apriles, on the jifth day before the Kalends of April. The Kalends being the first day of the month, this date would correspond to the 28th of March. The stereotyped expression, ante diem quintum Kalendas Apriles, arose from the conversion of die into the accusative through the influence of the preposition. The phrase perhaps originally was as given above, die quinto ante, etc.; and when ante was put first,—ante die quinto Kalendas,—the fact that it governed Kalendas was lost sight of. Its influence was then extended to die, which became the accusative, thus leaving Kalendas with no grammatical construction. What part of speech is Apriles?
L. Pisone A. Gabinio consulibus. The conjunction is often omitted in the enumeration of names of officials.
CHAPTER 7.
Caesari cum id nuntiatum esset, — maturat. Note position of Caesari.
The cum clauses with the subjunctive denote nothing more than a part of a past series of events. Often an English expression can be found much more simple, and conveying the temporal idea much less awkwardly than a heavy sentence introduced by when; e.g. the sentence means, Caesar, on receipt of the news that, etc., hastened.
eos — conari, in apposition with id. What other clauses have been already
used as nouns in the text ?
nb urbo, i.e. Rome, which was called, by way of distinction, ‘The City.’ So the Athenians often designated their city, Athens, by d<m> alone.proficiad. This infinitive is called the complementary infinitive, because it adds another action to that of the verb on which it depends. Such a term is arbitrary. .The infinitive was a verbal noun originally ; the passive infinitive is the dative case (e.g. da-s-ei, dari, legei, legi); the active the locative (e.g. da-s-i, dare, leg-es-i, legere). It is easy to see how “ he hastened for the setting out ” comes to mean “ he hastened to set out.”
quam—itineribus, by as long marches as possible. For the force of quam, see on quam maximum, chap. 3, The Greek paraphrast has ws varo t&xwtcl.
in Galliam ulteriorem, into farther Gaul. For the location of Farther Gaul, see map. Remember that the Alps form a great natural boundary line, and that a Roman is here writing. To him the Gaul here referred to is farther than what ? Nearer Gaul or Gallia citerior is nearer than what ? In what modern country is the latter ?
ad Genavam pervenit, into the vicinity of Geneva. Compare vii. 41, castra ad Gergoviam movit. According to Plutarch, he reached the Rhone in eight days.
provinciae toti, etc., he orders as great a number of soldiers as possible from the whole province; literally, he imposes upon the whole province a demand for as great a number, etc.
una, emphatic. We say “only one.”
pontem—iubet rescindi. Observe the omission of the conjunction. For a like case of asyndeton, cf. i. 20, Dumnorigem ad se vocat, fratrem adhibet.
pontem. The bridge across the Rhone. Note the asyndeton, expressive of haste.
ad Genavam. For meaning, cf. ad Hispaniam, chap. 1.
certiores facti sunt, were informed. What is the literal meaning ?
cuius legationis = quorum. The legatio comprehends the legatos preceding.
qui dicerent, a relative clause of purpose; literally, who should say, i.e. to say.
sibi esse in animo, that they intended ; literally, it was to them in mind.
1. quod —nullum. Observe the emphatic position of nullum. Compare i. 18, quod illo licente contra liceri audeat nemo.
rogare. The subject se is omitted; in same construction with esse above. In direct discourse we should have: “We ask (rogamus) that we (nobis) may do it in accord with your (tua) wish.”
occisum, sc. esse; and so also after pulsum, missum, and concedendum. This defeat occurred in the vicinity of Lake Geneva, 107 b.c.
sub iugum. Under this yoke the conquered were compelled to pass without arms, as a sign of complete submission. The iugum consisted of two spears set upright in the ground, and a third one placed across them at the top (Livy,[book 1.
28, tribus hastis iugum fit, humi fixis duabus, superque eas transversa una deligata).
concedendum, sc. id, referring to iter per provinciam facere. The student
will observe how frequent is the use of the impersonal. In such a use the mere verbal act is brought into prominence without reference to the actor, e.g. concedendum, concessions must be made; but no mention is made of who must make them, for that is sufficiently apparent; acriter pugnatum, there was a hot fight, but no reference to the combatants.
data facultate, if an opportunity were to be given them.
temperaturos, sc. esse, would refrain from injury and mischief.
dum — convenirent, until the soldiers, whom he had ordered, should assemble. dum {until) with the subjunctive refers to an event expected and purposed.
imperaverat. Compare provinciae toti — imperat.
ad Id. Apr. See on a. d. v. Kal. Apr., chap. 6. Idus is really an adjective agreeing with noctes. The word meant originally the clear (nights) of the month.
reverterentur. In the direct discourse the imperative was used; what was the form of the conditional sentence, si quid vellent?
CHAPTER 8,
ea legione militibusque. Ablative of means.
qui — influit. Caesar imagined that the lake flowed into the river. He had in view the point at which the river made its egress from the lake, and where a portion of the waters would flow into the river. Some editors have changed the text to quern in flumen Rhodanus influit, “ into which the river Rhone flows ” ; but this is unsatisfactory and artificial. Compare vii. 57, perpetuam esse paludem, quae influeret in Sequanam.
in altitudinem. For translation, cf. in latitudinem, chap. 2.
pedum. Partitive genitive.
castella communit, he strongly fortifies the redoubts. The force of com is intensive, he fortifies completely.
se invito, against his ivill; literally, he {being) unwilling.
si conarentur — possit. The historical present is here followed by both the imperfect and present. Compare chap. 7, quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare, ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat.
18. negat se more — dare, he says that he cannot; literally, he denies that he can give, etc.
1. si—conentur, for future (conabimini) of the direct discourse.
prohibiturum, sc. ae. Notice the omission of the object eo3.
Original fron HARVARD UNIVNOTES.
2. ea spe delecti, disappointed in this hope; literally, cast down from this hope.
ai — possent. Indirect question introduced by si Compare ii. 9, si nostri transirent, expect&bant.
CHAPTER 9.
una—via, only the way. qua, cf. chap. 0, vix qua singuli, una, emphatic. Observe the position of per Sequanos, which is really an adjective expression describing via.
sua sponte, by their own means, = per se. Compare v. 28, sua sponte populo Romano bellum facere.
eo deprecatore, by his mediation; literally, he (being) an intercessor. This is a good illustration of the origin of the ablative absolute. The student cannot understand its real significance until he sees how this construction, so common in Latin, arose. Absolute cases or case forms with a participle or some other part of speech are natural to language. We have the same thing in English. In old English it was the dative, but this dative stood for an instrumental or locative. The Latin employs the ablative, but this ablative, like the English Native, represents the instrumental or locative, more generally the instrumental. Here we find the instrumental eo deprecatore, with him as intercessor. So in divis volentibus, the original idea lay in the instrumental, xoith the gods willing, the simple instrumental of association. From this were made possible the various ways of translating the ablative absolute, and, in such translation, there should be perfect freedom from any stereotyped formula. In early Latin we find, just as we should expect to find, cum divis volentibus.
When the idea of time is prominent it is possible to see the locative in the ablative absolute, e.g. tertia inita vigilia, in the third watch which had been begun, i.e. in the beginning of the third watch. So the student can see how it is that this construction, at one time in syntactical accord with the rest of the sentence, became an absolute case, expressing all the various meanings of the instrumental and locative.	v
gratia — plurimum poterat, on account of his popularity and liberality, had very great influence with the Sequani; literally, was able very much.
ea civitate = eorum civitate.
in matrimonium duxerat, had married. The husband conducted his wife to his own house as a part of the marriage ceremony ; hence the phrase uxorem ducere. The expression nubere viro (for nubere se viro), to veil herself for a husband, is used in speaking of the woman.
novls — studebat, was aiming at a revolution.
suo beneficio habere obstrictas, to have attached to him by reason of his kindness. This use of habere is an anticipation of the part the verb Ho
z
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book I.
have * was to hold in verbal conjugation. The student will observe that habere obstrictas differs from obstrinxisse in the fact that the notion contained in the participle is looked upon as a possession. The transition is shown more clearly in chap. 15, quem ex omni provincia — coactum habebat (nearly = coegerat).
CHAPTER 10.
1. renuntiatur, word is brought back, i.e. messengers who had been sent returned with the tidings. Caesari. Note the position. Compare note to p. 71, 1. 9. Caesar receives word.
Helvetiis esse in animo. See note on sibi esse in animo, chap. 7.
quae civitas, which state; referring to the Tolosates. The antecedent is inserted in the relative clause, — a common Latin idiom.
id si fieret — futurum, if this should be done, he saw that it would be attended with great danger to the province that it should have, etc. The subject of futurum is t*he clause ut haberet, and the subject of haberet is provincia, to be supplied.
magno cum periculo. The favorite place for the preposition when the adjective is at all emphatic: great was the danger. Yet in the phrase below, ob eas causas, the preposition is always before the pronoun in spite of quam ob rem, hanc ob rem.
locis patentibus, in open places.
maximeque frumentariis. Adjectives in us preceded by a vowel form their comparison by means of the adverbs magis and maxime. Violations of this rule were undoubtedly common in the popular language.
finitimos haberet, have as neighbors.
Titum Labienum. See Vocabulary.
legatum. Our word lieutenant cannot adequately translate legatus. It is one who has been given a commission (participle of lego). So we find the diplomatic sense ambassador.
in Italiam, into Italy, i.e. Cisalpine Gaul.
magnis itineribus, by forced marches. Compare chap. 7, quam maximis potest itineribus.
Aquileiam. See Vocabulary.
qua proximum iter, where the route was shortest; literally, where the route was nearest.
compluribus—pulsis. In these four words the student has an ablative absolute and an ablative of means limited by an adjective. In translating remember the conttjn-.
-14. extremum, sc. oppidum.1. per angustias. Compare chap. 6, angustum et difficile, inter montem luram et flumen Rhodanum; and chap. 9, propter angustias.
cum — possent, unable (as they were) to defend themselves.
se suaque, literally, themselves and their possessions.
legatos — mittunt. The idea which makes possible the following indirect discourse is easily gathered from these words. The student will note how often the verb of saying is omitted.
rogatum. This so-called supine is a simple verbal noun in the accusative, to express limit of motion; cf. factu, chap. 3. The future passive infinitive is built up by means of this verbal noun ; e.g. milites occisum iri dicit. iri is the impersonal use of eo, to go ; occisum, the limit of motion ; milites, the object of occisum, which can govern an accusative as other verbal nouns. Compare note on reditionis, p. 70,1. 3.
ita se—meritos esse, that they had at all times so deserved of the Roman people that, etc. Indirect discourse after the idea of saying contained in rogatum.
in conspectu exercitus. Make correspondingly emphatic in English translation. Note the omission of the conjunction with the following verbs.
liberi eorum. Spoken from Caesar’s standpoint, hence eorum instead of sui.
agri debuerint, their fields ought not to have been laid waste, etc. Since the English verb ought has no past tense while the Latin debeo has, the force of the tense in debuerint is thus brought out. debeo implies a legal or moral obligation.
solum agri. Noun; except the soil of their land. Make emphatic in your translation both solum and nihil.
reliqui. Depends on nihil.
non exspectandum esse, he must not wait; literally, it must not be waited. sibi is the so-called dative of agent. This dative is nothing more than the simple dative of possession. As the gerund is a verbal noun, the origin of this construction may have been as follows : legendum mihi est, a reading is to me, legendum being subject of est, i.e. I have a reading; hence I must read. The gerundive construction is perhaps a conversion of the verbal noun into a verbal adjective, e.g. librum legendum mihi est, reading a book is to me, becoming liber legendus mihi est, a book to which the quality of reading belongs is to me, a book for reading is to me; hence I must read a book. (Compare the influence of ante in Roman Calendar, note on a. d. v. Kal., p. 71, 1. 7.) Whether the gerundive originally had a passive signification is uncertain. Compare secundus, = following ; hence second.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYCHAPTER 12.
76. 1. quod. The antecedent is flumen.
2. incredibili lenitate, with wonderful smoothness. See note on the ablative case under a Garumna flumine, p 66, 1. 10.
transibant, the act was still going on.
partes — flumen — traduxisse, partes is object of duxisse, and the preposition governs flumen.
Ararim. Both Arar and Liger have their accusative in im, and ablative in i or e.
de tertia vigilia. The preposition in this idiom denotes from the beginning of For vigilia see Introduction, 121 d.
cum legionibus. Ablative of accompaniment. For cum in hostile sense see cum Germanis, chap 1.
eos — aggressus — partem eorum concidit. An object used with both participle and verb. Compare chap. 54, hos adorti, magnum eorum numerum interficiunt; also ii. 10, hostes — nostri — aggressi magnum eorum numerum occiderunt. On use of these participles, cf. note on vicis exustis, chap. 5. Translate, encumbered (as they were) with baggage — he attacked them and cut to pieces, etc. Note how the Latin idiom sinks the two English sentences ftito one.
mandarunt = mandaverunt. At all periods of the language there was a tendency to drop v between vowels. Doubtless in many cases the v was retained in the written form, but omitted in pronunciation.
12. hic pagus unus. Compare chap. 13, unum pagum adortus esset.
quae pars — ea — persolvit = ea pars — quae — intulerat — persolvit.
princeps persolvit, was the first to pay the penalty. Note the idiom poenas persolvit. Punishment was looked upon as a debt which was owed to the injured party ; hence, to pay punishment (solvere), to give punishment (dare), where we say to suffer punishment. Compare 44 as we forgive our debtors.”
18. quod — interfecerant, because in the same battle in which they had slain Cassius, they had slain also his lieutenant Lucius. Cassium, object of interfecerant, to be supplied.
CHAPTER 13.
1. reliquas, emphatic. Such a position before the conjunction ut we call hyperbaton.
2. pontem—faciendum curat, literally, cares for a bridge to be built
cares for the building of a bridge. Compare note on gerundive, p. 75, 1. 13. Observe the idiom in Arare, over the Arar; trans could not be used. Note the
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
exactness in the use of the Latin preposition. We can say, “Rome is on the Tiber,” but the Romans said, Roma ad Tiberim sita est.
4. cum — intelligerent, when they perceived that he had done in one day that which they themselves had accomplished with the greatest difficulty in twenty days, namely, the crossing of the river. ut flumen transirent is in apposition with id, the object of fecisse. Compare chap. 6, id facere — ut — exeant.
bello Cassiano, in the Cassian war, i.e. in the war with Cassius.
si pacem, etc. Indirect discourse to end of chapter. In the direct narrative faceret would be future; ituros, future ; constituisset, future perfect.
sin perseveraret, sc. Caesar.
reminisceretur. Subjunctive for the imperative. Compare tribueret.
12. quod improviso, as to the fact that, cf. quod — gloriantur — admirarentur, chap. 14.
ne ob earn rem — tribueret, on that account; literally, on account of that thing he should not ascribe it (i.e. the victory) too much to his own valor.
despiceret, committeret. Why in the imperfect tense ?
didicisse, they had thus learned, i.e. been trained.
CHAPTER 14.
78. 1. his, to them, i.e. the legati. Compare chap. 34, ei legationi respondit. For the neuter see chap. 36, ad haec Ariovistus respondit.
eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, he felt less hesitation on this account. The clause quod teneret gives the reason.
eo gravius ferre—accidissent, and he felt the more indignant in proportion as it had happened without the desert of the Roman people, eo gravius. See note to hoc facilius, p. 67, 1. 2. Remember the force of English the in the more indignant.
qui si — fuisset (the antecedent of qui is populus Romanus), if they had been conscious of having done any injury, etc.
cavere. Subject of fuisse.
deceptum, sc. se esse.
commissum a se, best render by active, they had done anything. See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-26.
quare timeret, quare = propter quod, the antecedent of the quod being the omitted subject of commissum.
In the direct discourse, dari, ferre, fuisse, deceptum (esse), would be datur, fero, fuit, deceptus est; commemorassent, teneret, accidissent, fuisset, intellegeret, timeret, putavet, would be commemoraverunt, teneo, acciderunt, fuisset (condition contrary to fact), intellegebat, timeret (clause of characteristic), putabat.N0TE8,
 quod — vellet, but if he should consent to forget their former insult.
eo invito. Compare se invito, chap. 8.
num- posse. Regular questions in indirect discourse take the verb in the subjunctive ; but statements expressed in the form of questions (rhetorical questions), like all simple statements, take the accusative and infinitive. In the direct discourse, posse would be possum; vellet, temptassent, vexassent, would be velim, temptastis, vexastis.
quod — gloriarentur, the fact that they boasted so insolently of their victory, i.e. their boasting so insolently. See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-2(3.
eodem pertinere, amount to the same thing; literally, tend to the same place. The subject of pertinere is the preceding clauses.
In the direct discourse pertinere would be pertinet; gloriarentur, admirarentur, would be gloriamini, admiramini.
quo — doleant, that men 'may grieve the more from a change of circum• stances.
quos — velint. The relative clause is put first. The antecedent of quos is his in line below.
What would consuesse be in the direct discourse? What velint? Observe that we pass from under the influence of the secondary tense to the free expression of the original thought.
facturos (esse), sc. eos as subject.
Haeduis (dative after satisfaciant); literally, do enough for them, i.e. satisfy.
In the direct discourse facturum would be faciam; dentur, polliceantur, intellegat, would be dabuntur, pollicemini, intellegam. What would be the form of intulerint and satisfaciant?
eius rei. See note on ea res — enuntiata, p. 69, 1. 1.
CHAPTER 15,
1. movent, sc. Helvetii.
quem — coactum habebat. See note on habere obstrictas, p. 73,1. 14.
qui videant. The antecedent of qui is the collective idea contained in equitatum, as if equites had been used. Compare chap. 2, civitati persuasit, ut — exirent.
quas — faciant. Indirect question*.
cupidius, too eagerly, novissimum agmen, the part of the line that is ‘newest,’ i.e. the rear.
alieno loco = iniquo loco, in an unfavorable place; literally, in a place belonging to another; in contrast with suo loco, in a favorable place,
pauci de nostris, a few of our soldiers. de nostris = nostrorum. This useNOTES.
of the preposition is an anticipation of the part de was to play in noun inflection in the Romance languages. This preposition, we may say, exerted the strongest influence for the breakdown of the inflectional system.
9. novissimo agmine, locative ablative.
11. in praesentia, for the present.
13. nostrum primum, sc. agmen, our first line, i.e. van.
CHAPTER 16.
essent polliciti. Subjunctive. The clause is represented as being the
statement of another,—which (as Caesar said) they had promised, hence it is a subordinate clause in indirect discourse. Or the subjunctive may be used because the clause is used to describe or characterize frumentum as well as to state that they had promised it. (Subjunctive of characteristic.)
flagitare. The historical infinitive. In what case is its subject ? flagito is to demand with earnestness and importunity.
frigora, the cold weather. The plural shows the continued cold.
ut ante dictum eat. Chap. 1.
frumenta, plural always for grain in the fields.
ne pabuli quidem. The emphatic word always between the ne and quidem. For use of ne in this phrase, see note to p. 126,1. 23, ne perspici quidem.
80. 4. diem ex die ducere Haedui, the Haedui were putting him off from day to day, and were saying, etc. For omission of the object, cf. chap. 6, coacturos. ducere and dicere are historical infinitives; cf. flagitare. These infinitives are as if the writer did not stop to concern himself about the proper mood and tense, but hurried on, leaving the verb indefinite.
conferri, comportari, adesae. Note the climax, that it was being collected, that it was being transported, that it was right at hand.
diem — quo die, the day when.
metiri. See Introduction, Roman Art of War.
qui summo magistratui praeerat, who held the chief magistracy.
in suos, over his own people.
necessario tempore, at so critical a time.
quod — sublevetur. The cause on the authority of another; i.e. the subject of accusat. Compare quod sit destitutus.
CHAPTER 17.
17. prlvatim plus possint, have more influence as individuals.
valeat, possint. These would be subjunctive in the direct discourse. Why ?
ne conferant. Plural, because of the collective idea in multitudinem.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERS[book l
20. posaint for possunt in direct discourse.
si lam — praeferre, if they cannot any longer hold the leadership of Gaul, they prefer the dominion of the Gauls to that of the Romans.
superaverint. For the future perfect of the direct discourse.
81. 1. Haeduis. The dative for the ablative of separation. This dative, which occurs with certain compounds of ab, de, ex, is best explained as the dative of disadvantage, going with the whole idea of the sentence, and not merely with the verb; i.e. as far as the Haedui were concerned, their freedom would be wrested away from them.
sint erepturi, would be subjunctive in direct discourse. Why ?
ab eisdem, by the same persons, i.e. the nonnullos above.
a se, by himself as chief magistrate.
quin etiam, nay even, moreover.
5. quam diu potuerit, as long as he could.
In the direct discourse intellegere, tacuisse would be intellego, tacui; enuntiarit, fecerit, potuerit would be enuntiavi, fecerim (why subjunctive ?), potui.
CHAPTER 18
quod — nolebat, because he was unwilling that these matters should be discussed in the presence of several. lactari, frequentative of iacio. How does it come to mean discuss f
Jjiscum retinet (observe the asyndeton; cf. note on iubet rescindi, p. 71, 1. 14), but detains Liscus.
ex solo, from him in private.
summa audacia, sc. virum, a man of the highest daring, or better, greatest daring.	y
portoria, duties on exports and imports.
vectigalia, whatever is brought in. A name for taxes in general; revenues from any source, as from the public pastures, products of the land, etc.
vectigalia — redempta habere, he had the purchased revenues = he had purchased the revenues, etc. What single word with almost the same meaning as redempta habere might have been used ? Compare quem coactum habebat, chap. 15. The publicani, or farmers of the revenues, bought them of the government and collected them.
pretio, at a small cost. Ablative of price. See note on the ablative case under a Garumna flumine, p. 66, 1. 10.
illo licente (from liceor), when he was bidding. This is the first present participle which has been used in the text with its proper verbal force. About how many perfect passive participles have been used? In the English sentence, The Ceutrones, seizing the higher places, try to keep the army from the march,how is the English present participle seizing translated into Latin ? Compare the Latin for this sentence in chap. 10. Why is the tense of the Latin participle occupatis more accurate than that of the English seizing f How is the English present participle crossing translated in they were crossing ? Compare the translation in chap. 12. Give two reasons why the present participle is more common in English than in Latin. Note the collocation licente contra liceri. Bring this out in translation, to bid against him, when he was bidding, no one dares. See Hints for Translating, pp. 326-26.
audeat nemo. Compare note on nullum, p. 72,1.1. audeat for audet of the direct discourse.
comparasse, for comparavisse. See note on mandarunt, p. 76, 1. 10.
domi, at home.
Biturigibus, composed of Gallic bitu, ‘wood,’ ‘forest/ and rix, ‘king.’
ex Helvetiis uxorem habere. Compare chap. 3, eique filiam suam in matrimonium dat.
In direct discourse auxisse, comparasse, alere, habere, posse, conlocasse, habere, conlocasse, would be auxit, comparavit, alit, habet, potest, conlocavit, habet, conlocavit.
nuptum conlocasse, had given in marriage, nuptum, see note on in matrimonium duxerat, p. 73, 1. 12.
favere — Helvetiis, he favored and wished well to the Helvetians.
82.	1. suo nomine, on his own account ,* literally, in his own name, — an ex
pression derived from mercantile life, where one’s name is written at the top of the ledger and everything under it put to his account.
summam in spem, cf. note to magno cum periculo, p. 74, 1. 4.
7. quod proelium equestre adversum — initium eius fugae factum, as to the fact that an unsuccessful engagement of cavalry had taken place, quod may be treated as a conjunction, cf. chap. 13, quod adortus esset; or it can be regarded as a relative, proelium — adversum being attracted into the relative clause, and its place being taken in the antecedent clause by eius fugae,— i.e. the beginning of the flight in the unsuccessful cavalry battle, which battle, etc.
CHAPTER 19,
certissimae res accederent, most undoubted facts were added.
quod—traduxisset, quod — curasset, quod — fecisset. These clauses are in apposition with res. Compare for the facts here stated chap. 9, ut per fines suos Helvetios ire patiantur, obsidesque uti dent, perficit.
dandos, sc. esse.
iniussu suo et civitatis, without his authority or that of the state. What in the Latin is translated without f
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book i.
Inscientibus ipsis, even without their knowledge. ipsis refers to the Haedui.
in eum animadverteret, why he should either punish him himself; literally, direct his attention against him.
unum, one consideration. Explained by quod.
quod — cognoverat. The present cognosco is inceptive, begin to know; hence cognovi = I have learned, i.e. I know.
studium — voluntatem, — fidem, iustitiam, temperantiam. Note omission of the conjunction. Make as vivid in the English as in the Latin.
voluntatem = good will; here used with meaning of benevolentia.
83. 2. cotidianis — remotis, when the ordinary interpreters had been withdrawn.
3. cui — fidem habebat, in whom he was accustomed to repose the highest confidence in all matters. What is it literally ?
apud se, in his presence, i.e. Caesar’s.
CHAPTER 20,
multis cum lacrimis, cum with the ablative of manner conveys the notion of addition or unexpectedness. Compare Introduction, Inductive Studies, under the Ablative.
obsecrare coepit. The student will find this passage discussed in the Inductive Studies, under Indirect biscourse.
quid gravius, anything too severe, i.e. no severe measure.
plus doloris. Be careful to make good English of this Latin idiom.
14. opibus ac nervis, and this power and strength he used, nervis = potentia.
non solum — sed. Note the omission of etiam. This happens when the second member contains the more important thought.
17. si quid — accidisset, if anything very severe should happen to him from Caesar, accidisset = the future perfect indicative of the direct discourse.
19. futurum uti — averterentur, it would happen that, etc. The periphrastic form futurum esse with the subjunctive is used for the future infinitive of verbs which have no “ supine stem ” ; also for the future passive infinitive, which rarely occurs; and frequently with verbs which have a future infinitive.
tanti — ostendit, shows him mat his influence with him [Caesar] is so great. Illustrate by the use of the pronouns eius and se in this sentence the rule for the antecedents of these pronouns.
84. 2. vocat, adhibet. For the asyndeton, see note on p. 81, 1. 8, Liscum retinet.
praeterita, things bygone, i.e. the past.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY

















































































































pronoun stem do, the accusative implying duration of time ; hence its meaning was a while. Compare nondum, interdum, etiamdum. From this use it passed to that of a pure conjunction.
nocte intermissa, a night having intervened.
perterriti. Remember to feel the force of the preposition in all compound verbs.
ne — adficerentur. ne, after verbs of fearing, is to be rendered that or lest. The origin of the use of ne in expressions of fear probably goes back to the form of a wish, e.g. ne veniat; metuo, “may he not come ; I fear (he will),” came to mean “ I fear that he will come.” ut veniat; metuo, “ may he come ; I fear (he will not),” came to mean, “ I fear he will not come.”
in tanta multitudine. The in expresses cause: since so many were in the surrender.
occultari — existimarent, they supposed their flight could either he concealed or he entirely unnoticed.
prima nocte, in the early part of the night. How does the context show that this cannot mean in the first night f
CHAPTER 28.
resciit, discovered, resciscere, according to Aulus Gellius, 2,19, refers tc knowledge in regard to anything which is unexpected or hidden.
quorum. The antecedent is his below.
sibi purgati, blameless in his sight. Compare iv. 13, 5, sui purgandi causa: Derivation of purgare? Compare “ Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean,” Ps. li. 7. sibi is the dative of reference.
 reductos—habuit, he treated them, when brought hack, as enemies, i.e. they were put to death or sold as slaves.
ut iis frumenti copiam facerent, to furnish them a supply of grain.
quos incenderant, i.e. the particular towns in chap. 5 ; hence the indicative, expressing a fact stated by Caesar.
id ea maxime ratione fecit, quod, he did this especially because.
19. vacare, to he empty; cf. patere, to lie open, chap. 2 ; licere, to he permitted, chap. 7 ; cavere, to he on one's guard, chap. 14; tacere, to he silent, chap. 17. Do these verbs assert action or state ? Are they transitive or intransitive ? How many English words must be used to express the meaning of each one ?
21. Boios. Object of conlocarent. petentibus Haeduis, dative after concessit.
90. 2. parem atque ipsi erant, same terms of freedom as they themselves had; literally, same terms and they themselves were (on the same terms).
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYtabulae, tablets. The word is applied to any flat substance used for writing, usually wood covered with wax.
litteris Graecis confectae, made out in Greek characters. Some hold that litteris Graecis implies the Greek language, although such an interpretation is not necessary. The general opinion is that the Helvetii used the Greek alphabet merely, having become acquainted with it from the Greek colony at Marseilles, in the south of Gaul. Compare v. 48, hanc Graecis conscriptam litteris mittit; and vi. 14, Graecis litteris utantur. See Introduction, Description of Gaul; illustrations of Gallic coins.
ratio. Introducing the indirect question.
capitum, souls, i.e. Helvetii. Compare English ‘head of cattle.’
ad milia. See note on ad milia, p. 69, 1. 5.
fuerunt. Agreeing with the predicate noun milia.
ad is an adverb, and does not influence the construction. Compare note on ad milia.
CHAPTER 30,
Helvetiorum, with the Helvetians.
91. 1. totius fere Galliae, i.e. Celtic Gaul, the third of the three divisions. See chap. 1. Compare chap. 31, Galliae totius factiones esse duas.
Helvetiorum iniuriis populi Romani (two genitives; Helvetiorum is
subjective, populi Romani objective), wrongs inflicted upon the Romans by the Helvetians. Compare vii. 26, universae Galliae consensio libertatis vindicandae.
ex usu terrae Galliae, to the advantage of the land of Gaul, terrae takes Galliae in apposition with it for terrae Gallicae. Compare iii. 7, mare Oceanum.
florentissimia rebus, though their condition was prosperous.
uti — inferrent. Note how the purpose clause is anticipated by eo concilio. Translate, with the purpose of making war.
domicilio. Dat. of purpose.
ex magna copia, out of a great abundance.
10. petierunt, uti — facere liceret: sese habere. Note the change from the subjunctive to the accusative. Why ?
ex consensu, in accordance with the common consent.
nisi quibus, i.e. nisi ii quibus, unless those (disclose it) to whom this duty should be assigned by the common council, mandatum esset, what form in the direct discourse ?
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book l
CHAPTER 31.
idem = iidem.
qui ante fuerant, ad Caesarem, who had before been (to him), returned to Caesar. With fuerant, sc. apud eum.
secreto in occulto, apart from others in a secret place. This is the reading of the common text. Some regard in occulto as a marginal note written by some scribe and later inserted in the text. Others defend the text by making secreto mean “without witnesses,” and occulto, “in a secret place.”
Caesari ad pedes proiecerunt.. threw themselves at Caesar's feet. The dative taken with the whole idea of the clause, instead of the genitive in close union with pedes.
non minus—contendere, they no less strove and labored.
3. Galliae totius factiones esse duas (cf. vi. 12, alterius factionis principes erant Haedui, alterius Sequani), there were two parties in the whole of Gaul, factiones refers to the two political parties of Gaul, factio originally contained no bad notion like that in the English word faction, but, according to Festus, is “honestum vocabulum.” For the order, cf. note to apud Helvetios— Orgetorix, p. 66, 1. 14.
4. principatum tenere, hold the leadership.
6. potentatu. Only here in Caesar, for principatu.
inter se. See note on inter se, p. 66,1. 6.
6. factum esse, it came to pass.
adamassent, for adamavissent. See note on mandarunt, p. 76,1.10.
clientes, dependents, i.e. the subject states. Compare vi. 12, summa auctoritas erat in Haeduis magnaeque eorum erant clientelae.
calamitatem. Explained by what follows.
senatum. Compare ii. 6, omnem senatum ad se convenire.
14. populi Romani hospitio, by the hospitality of the Roman people. The relation of hospitality existed between states as well as between individuals. It was this hospitium on the part of the Roman people that gave to the Haedui their power in Gaul. Compare vi. 6, cum his esse hospitium Ambiorigi sciebat; also vii. 75, pro eius hospitio duo milia una miserunt.
quo minus—essent, quominus, whereby less softens a refusal. For origin of this construction, see note to tenebantur quo minus, iii. 23.
ob earn rem. In this phrase the position of the preposition is never changed. See note on magno cum periculo, p. 74, 1. 4.
ad senatum — postulatum, lit. had gone to Rome to the senate to ask for aid. Notice that after a verb of motion both nouns are in the accusative. This should be remembered, especially in translating English into Latin. In English we say “had gone to the senate at Rome.” He did not succeed in his effort Compare vi. 12, Romam ad senatum profectus imperfecta re redierat.





































NOTES.
quam reliquorum, than that of the rest. See note to M. Crassi, p. 84,1. 16.
absentia, even when absent.
horrerent, with a direct object. The old signification of the word was to bristle or become erect; then the feeling derived from such action—e.g. in Lucretius, horror refers to the grating sound of a saw. In Latin the word applies always to disagreeable sensations, as fear, dread, etc., although the root originally admitted the idea of both pleasure and pain.
Sequanis. Dative of agent, with essent perferendi; for the literal translation of which, cf. note on non exspectandum esse, p. 75,1. 13.
CHAPTER 33.
sibi eam rem curae futuram, he would attend to the matter; literally, the matter would be for a care to him.
beneficio suo, by his kindness, i.e. by the kindness Caesar had done Ariovistus; referring to the title ‘king* and ‘friend’ which had been given him. Compare chap. 35, cum in consulatu suo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus.
secundum, in harmony with; literally, following (sequor). Compare note on secundus, p. 75, 1. 13. What part of speech here ?
quare putaret, by which thing he should think, i.e. to think.
fratres consanguineosque. Compare chap. 11, necessarii et consanguinei.
Germanos consuescere and magnam — multitudinem venire are the
subjects of esse to be supplied, periculosum is in agreement with the two clauses.
95. 2. sibi temperaturos — quin, would restrain themselves from going forth into the province. See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-6. ut — fecissent, subjunctive, because in the indirect discourse. What two meanings has ut as a conjunction and with what difference of mode ? Compare ut — arbitrantur, chap. 4, and ut — essent, chap. 6.
quin — exirent. See note on quin, p. 68, 1. 14. The relative stem “ whereby,” expressing result or purpose, gave the construction after verbs of refraining.
Teutonique,—in vii. 77 the plural nominative is Teutones, as shown
from the genitive.
quibus — occurrendum, and these things he thought he ought to meet
as speedily as possible.
ipse. Why emphatic ? In contrast to what ?
tantos sibi spiritus — sumpserat. How does the English * to put on airs ’ illustrate the meaning of spiritus in this passage ? How does sumere differ in meaning from capere? Compare English assumption.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYqui ab eo postularent, to demand of him.
conloquio, for a conference, locum medium utriusque, midway between both, utriusque is the genitive with the adjective medium.
de re 'publica — agere, to treat on the public weal, i.e. public matters summis utriusque rebus, matters of the highest importance to both of them.
si quid se — velit, if he wanted anything of him. velle takes two accusatives, after the analogy of a verb of asking.
negotii (partitive genitive with quid), what business.
CHAPTER 35.
96. 2. tanto — adfectus, treated with so great kindness by himself and the Roman people. Compare chap. 33, suo beneficio. By what clause might the participle adfectus be translated here ? For use of participle with meaning of • clause, see damnatum, chap. 4.
4. hanc gratiam referret, made such a return as this. Note emphatic position of hanc.
8. trans Rhenum traduceret. Observe the repetition of the preposition.
quos illi — illis. The antecedent of quos is the omitted object of reddere. What is the antecedent of illi and illis ?
12. fecisset, impetraret. What moods and tenses would these verbs have taken if this were the direct discourse ?
15. quod commodo — facere posset, so far as he could do so consistently with the interests of the state, commodo, ablative of specification.
CHAPTER 36.
ut—imperarent, that those who had conquered should rule those whom they had conquered in whatever way they chose. vicissent for the future perfeci of the direct discourse.
alterius praescriptum, dictation of any one else.
23. in suo iure impediri, ought not to be obstructed in his right.
eibi. Construe with stipendiarios.
97. 1. magnam — iniuriam.	Make magnam just as emphatic in the
English.
qui — faceret, because he was making his revenues less.
quod convenisset, which had been agreed upon. Compare ii. 19, quod tempus inter eos convenerat.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVEf[book I.
6. longe—afuturum, name of brothers would not help them; literally, be a great way from them. Compare Verg. Aen. xii. 52, longe illi dea mater erit.
cum vellet, congrederetur would be in the direct discourse cum volet, congrediatur, if he wants to, let him come on.
invicti Germani, invincible Germans; literally, unconquered, hence not liable to be.
inter annos, during {fourteen) years. This expression, as well as per annos for the simple accusative of duration of time, anticipates the future influence of the preposition. Compare Inductive Studies, The Ablative Case, B, e.
CHAPTER 37
eodem tempore — et, at the same time — that. See note on parem — atque, p. 90,1. 2.
ab Haeduis — a Treveris. The repetition of the preposition makes prominent the two embassies.
questum, sc. veniebant.
quod — popularentur. The reason of the complaint, stated on authority of the Haedui, —hence in indirect discourse when stated by Caesar as it is here.
obsidibus datis, even by giving hostages.
pacem redimere potuisse, able to purchase peace. Compare chap. 44, amicitiam — redimere posset.
resisti posset, sc. Ariovisto, impersonal construction, (Ariovistus) might be less easily withstood.
CHAPTER 38.
98. 1. cum tridui viam processisset, when he had proceeded three days' journey.
quod. The relative refers to Vesontionem, but agrees with oppidum. Compare ii. 1, omnes Belgas, quam tertiam esse Galliae partem dixeramus.
magnopere sibi praecavendum (esse), that he ought to take the greatest precautions.
6. summa — facultas, an abundant supply. Compare Cic. De Offic., 1, 3, facultates rerum.
10. pedum, amplius may not influence the construction, since the comparatives plus, amplius, minus, etc., are often used in this way. The origin of this use is perhaps in the addition of a modifying statement, as if the writer had said, “ which is of six hundred feet, —not more any way.” ut circino, as by a pair of compasses. Give the two uses of ut already noted. As the distance actually measures sixteen hundred feet, it is possible that an m. before the dc.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY










































































4. primorum ordinum centuriones. See Introduction, 100.
6. per tribunos — egerunt, arranged with the tribunes.
satisfacerent, apologize.
se — existimavisse. Indirect discourse after the idea of saying implied in satisfacerent. Compare note on Ariovistum, etc., p. 100, 1. 6.
summa belli, conduct of the war.
suum — imperatoris. Predicate after esse understood.
satisfactione, apology. Compare satisfacerent.
ex aliis, beyond all others. See note on the ablative after the comparative, under the general discussion of the ablative in chap. 2.
el — fidem habebat, had—trust in him. Either the dative or ablative can be used in this expression.
ut — duceret (a result clause after the ablative absolute itinere exquisito), the road having been reconnoitred and found to be such that it would lead, etc.
locis apertis, through an open country.
12. milibus, ablative of distance. See general discussion of the ablative in chap. 2.
CHAPTER 42,
de conloqulo. Note meaning of the preposition concerning. The original notion down from is seen when we remember that everything spoken hung from that topic. From a different point of view we say, “he spoke about a thing,” i.e. everything he said clustered about it. So circa, e.g. errorem circa litteras habuit.
per se, with his consent.
petenti, to his request; literally, to him asking it.
ultro polliceretur, he actually promised.
pro suls — beneficiis. Compare chap. 33, beneficio suo.
fore uti desisteret, that he would desist.
conloqulo, dative of purpose.
ultro citroque, hither and thither.
103. 2. alia ratione, on any other terms.
4. interposita causa, by alleging any excuse.
8. eo imponere, upon them, = in eos. Compare chap. 53, eo mulieres imposuerant.
10. si quid — esset, if there should be any need of action.
ad equum rescribere, make knights of them. The expression has a double meaning, hence the joke, non inridicule, to enroll as cavalrymen, or to enroll as knights, a privileged Roman class.[book i.
CHAPTER 43.
tumulus terrenus, hill free from rocks. Compare Sail. Jug., 92, 5, mons saxeus.
aequo spatio aberat, was at nearly an equal distance. Compare chap. 41, Ariovisti xx abesse.
spatio, ablative of degree of difference.
equis, on horseback. Ablative of means.
ex equis, on horseback. Compare note on ex vinculis, p. 69, 1. 2. Note the hyperbaton.
denos, ten each.
4. pro officiis, in return for great services.
aditum, access. Compare v. 41, aliquem sermonis aditum causamque.
ut, how. In such meaning we see the interrogative conjunction. See note on uti, p. 70, 1. 6. quam veteres—appetissent. Compare chaps. 11 and 31.
12. sui nihil, nothing of their own.
at, at least.
amplius. See note on pedum, p. 98, 1. 10.
CHAPTER 44.
de suis. Observe the asyndeton.
rogatum et arcessitum. Agreeing with sese.
Gallis. The Arverni and Sequani.
1. ipsis, sc. Gallis.
2. capere. For omission of the subject, cf. rogare, chap. 7.
victores victis. Note collocation. See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-26.
ac contra se castra habuisse, had encamped against him.
uno proelio. Compare chap. 31.
si — velint. In direct discourse, si — volunt.
paratum esse decertare. Notice that the infinitive is used with paratum. Compare ii. 3, paratosque esse et obsides dare. In chap. 5 paratus took the gerundive construction with ad: paratiores ad omnia pericula subeunda. See discussion of the infinitive, chap. 7.
pace uti velint, wish to enjoy peace.
amicitiam — esse. Subject of oportere.
idque, not eamque, because it refers to the idea contained in amicitiam, admitting of a more general meaning,—that relation.
si — remittatur. In direct discourse, si — remittetur.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY13. quod — traducat, respecting his bringing over. See Hints for Translating, pp. 326-26.
nisi rogatus, without being asked. See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-26.
defenderit (sc. bellum as object), had warded it off. Compare ii. 29, alias inlatum defenderent; also Civil War, ii. 2, ignem defendere.
provinciam suam. Make correspondingly emphatic in the English translation.
hanc Galliam, this part of Gaul; literally, this Gaul.
ut oporteret, as it would not be proper to pardon him if etc. Why is concedi in the impersonal construction ? ipsi = sibi, Ariovistus.
quod — diceret, as to his saying. See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-26.
imperitum rerum, ignorant of affairs.
debere — habere, that he had a right to suspect that Caesar, inasmuch as he had an army in Gaul, kept it there, although under the pretense of friendship, for the sake of crushing him. How does debere differ from oportere ? See note on debuerint, p. 75, 1. 7.
quod (moreover) si eum interfecerit — gratum esse facturum. In direct discourse it would be quod si te interfecero, gratum — faciam. The death of Caesar would be a welcome thing to the aristocracy. Ariovistus knew the party rivalries at Rome.
106. 1. id compertum habere, had ascertained. See note on obstrictas habere, p. 73, 1. 14.
CHAPTER 45.
in eam sententiam, to this effect; for the purpose of showing; followed by qnare, why. This use of the preposition is an anticipation of the force in was to have in the post-Ciceronian writers to denote result or purpose ; e.g. in libertatem pugnare, Livy, xxiv. 2, 4. The phrase in memoriam, which has such a vogue among us to-day, makes the use of in to denote purpose seem by no means strange ; but such a notion in the preposition is entirely undassical.
Galliam = Celticam Galliam.
populus — ignovisset, the Roman people had pardoned.
antiquissimum quodque. For use of the superlative with quisque, see note on nobilissimi cuiusque, p. 93,1. 6.
CHAPTER 46,
19. propius tumulum accedere, were approaching nearer the mound, tumulum is the accusative with the adverb propius, after the analogy of the preposition prope. Compare Sail. Jug., 49, ipse propior montem suos conlocat; also
7, proximus mare — hiemarat. ad nostros adequitare — in nostros conicere. Note repetition of nostros.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY












































































[book I,
phalange facta. Compare chap. 24, reiecto nostro equitatn phalange facta.
6. complures nostri milites, very many of our soldiers.
in phalangas, upon the phalanxes. The Latin word representing this compact order was testudo. For the Greek form of accusative, cf. Allobrogas, chap. 14.
a sinistro cornu. See a dextro cornu above.
11. expeditior erat, was more disengaged.
CHAPTER 63.
17. viribus confisi, relying on their strength.
duae uxores. The Germans usually had one wife ; but their nobles had more, as we learn from Tacitus, prope soli barbarorum singulis uxoribus contenti sunt, exceptis admodum paucis, qui — ob nobilitatem plurimis nuptiis ambiuntur. See Introduction, 85.
duxerat, had married. See note on in matrimonium duxerat, chap. 9.
1. duae filiae harum (i.e. uxorum), altera — altera, of their two
daughters, one was slain, the other captured, filiae, nom. plur., a Greek construction, instead of the partitive genitive.
4. in ipsum Caesarem — incidit, fell into the hands of Caesar himself.
calamitate, euphemism for morte.
12. ter sortibus. Probably three was a sacred and mystical number with the Germans, as it was among several other ancient nations. We know from Tacitus (ter singulos tollit) that they consulted the lot three times.
CHAPTER 64.
18. perterritos insecuti magnum ex iis numerum occiderunt. For the
object with the participle and verb, see note on eos impeditos — aggressus — partem — concidit, p. 76, 1. 9.
in hiberna in Sequanos, into winter quarters among the Sequani. Why could not Sequanos be in the ablative ? See note on Romam ad senatum, p. 92,1. 21.
ad conventus agendos, to hold courts. The Roman governors of provinces held these conventus for regulating taxes and administering justice.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
BOOK II.
CHAPTER 1.
1. cum esset. The position of the verb is emphatic. While he was in Northern Italy (as shown in bk. i.), Caesar received frequent reports. The student should observe that cum, with the imperfect or pluperfect subjunctive, had become at this period of the language the ordinary method of denoting time, often with no greater force than a mere participle or ablative absolute. Any expression in the English translation which will convey the simple temporal idea is often preferable to a heavy temporal clause, e.g. at the time of Caesar's stay in Cisalpine Gaul. cum (quom, the adverbial accusative singular of the neuter of the relative), originally took the indicative unless for some outside reason the subjunctive was required. The demands for a subjunctive in the cum clause were so frequent that the Romans felt there was something in cum itself which required the subjunctive. So universal had this practice become in the time of Caesar that whenever cum introduced a clause which formed part of a series of events, it took the subjunctive in the imperfect or pluperfect tenses. When the past action is brought into prominence, then the indicative must naturally be used. Compare cum—videbatur, i. 40.
To illustrate how arbitrary is the use of cum with the subjunctive, the student will remember that causal clauses introduced by cum take the subjunctive in the classical period, but causal clauses introduced by quoniam (which is really the same word, quom + iam) take the indicative.
in hibernis. Caesar perhaps had with him a small force, which had gone into winter quarters in Cisalpine Gaul.
crebri — adferebantur, frequent reports were brought to him. The imperfect denotes the repeated action suggested by crebri. Note the emphatic position ; frequent were the rumors that reached him.
litterisque, the instrumental ablative, i.e. that use of the ablative which represents in Latin the instrumental case, the case of association, means, and agent.
certior fiebat. See idioms.
omnes Belgas —coniurare — dare. The indirect discourse. Direct Belgae — coniurant—dant. The use of the infinitive may have seemed strange to the pupil when he first came to this construction. It is really the same thing which we see in English when we say u I never knew him to do it.” The present infinitive in the active voice was originally a verbal noun in the locative case. Hence dare (for da — s — i) would have signified at first * in the giving, in
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYdm
giving.’ By degrees its substantive character was forgotten and it took the nature of a verb, e.g. “ He knew the Belgae in the giving or to give hostages,” came to mean, 44 He knew that the Belgae were giving hostages.” Note that in English, after a past tense of a verb of knowing, saying, etc., we use a past tense in the subordinate clause also, e.g. “He knew that they were giving.” In Latin the present must be employed, because the time of the infinitive is bound to that of the principal verb: at the time of Caesar’s knowing this (no matter whether it is present or past), the act of giving hostages was going on.
quam tertiam. For the attraction of the antecedent, see note on i. 38, Vesontionem, quod est oppidum.
6. dixeramus. See chap. 1. The indicative, because the parenthetical sentence is entirely outside of the indirect discourse. In the pluperfect tense we see the explanatory clause as a past historical fact. Compare iv. 27, quem supra demonstraveram, ii. 24, quos — dixeram, ii. 28, quos—dixeram.
inter se, to one another. The Latin has no reciprocal pronoun, inter se, inter vos, inter nos, take its place. The student should avoid rendering the phrase literally, but should translate by the case the reciprocal pronoun would have had. Compare i. 1, inter se differunt.
coniurandi—causas; primum — deinde, the reasons for the conspiracy were the following, —first, because, etc., second, because, etc. Beginning with partim qui, we pass out of Labienus’ report to Caesar’s description of nonnullis Gallis, some of whom (partim) do not want the Roman army in Gaul, others of whom are naturally fickle. Besides these two classes there are several (ab non—nullis) who think Roman dominion will interfere with their ambitions.
quod vererentur —quod —sollicitarentur, because (as they said) they feared, the reason being stated on the authority of the Belgae.
omni pacata Gallia, after (Celtic) Gaul was subdued, pacata, cf. L 6, qui nuper pacati erant.
ad eos for ad se. In subordinate clauses se refers to the subject of the principal clause, but it is sometimes used for the reflexive to avoid ambiguity. Compare i. 5, cum iis proficiscantur.
13. partim qui — partim qui, a part of whom —others of whom. What is the literal translation ?
inveterascere, to settle, to gain a footing.
moleste ferebant, took it ill, bore it hard. The expression, like a verb of thinking, takes the indirect discourse, exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere.
novis imperiis, a revolution. Compare novis rebus.
ab nonnullis, (they were instigated) by some also.
1. vulgo regna occupabantur. Note meaning of occupo (ob+capio). The student should avoid translating the word by its English derivative.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
qui — poterant. Note adversative force in qui, but who.
imperio nostro, under our dominion.
CHAPTER 2.
6. inita aestate, at the beginning of the summer. The ablative absolute. Here we can see the locative in the temporal expression which the ablative represents. See note to eo deprecatore, p. 73,1. 10. In (the time of) the summer which had been begun, i.e. at the beginning of the summer. We have aestas initur, never aestas init.
in interiorem Galliam, into the inner part of Gaul; cf. summus mons, i. 22. Such adjectives of partitive sense generally agree with their noun. Rarely the neuter substantive is used with the partitive genitive, e.g. aestatis extremum.
qui deduceret, to conduct them.
Pedium. Pedius was the son of Caesar's sister Julia.
cum primum, as soon as. cum primum. Note the subjunctive. Regularly cum primum (as simul atque, postquam, ubi) takes the indicative in mere temporal expressions. Here the student will see reason for Caesar’s return to the army, as well as the time.
dat negotium, he employs, directs.
se — certiorem faciant, inform him.
constanter, uniformly, i.e. without any discrepancy in their accounts.
12. dubitandum — quin, to hesitate to march. The construction of quin with the subjunctive, after dubitare in this sense, is rare. Compare Cic. pro Sull., chap. 2, non dubitasse quin defenderet. The infinitive is the regular construction. quin, which is really the locative or instrumental of the interrogative and relative pronoun qui with ne (not), can express purpose, result, 4 whereby not,’ 4 that not,’ or interrogation 4 why not ? ’ The former gives the construction after verbs of preventing and negative sentences, the latter after expressions of doubt, e.g. prohibet quin faciam, 44he prevents me from doing it” is literally 44 he prevents whereby (i.e. by which act of preventing) I should not do it.”
CHAPTER 3.
cum—venisset. See note on cum esset, p. 113,1. 1.
de improviso, unexpectedly; literally, from the unforeseen.
celeriiuique omni opinione, and sooner than any one expected, opinione. Such an ablative after a comparative is really an ablative of separation. The pupil should see that there is nothing mysterious in such expressions. He must not think that a quam has been shoved out and the noun put into the ablative. The two constructions, with and without quam, are entirely inde-
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book II.
pendent of each other. When we say Caesar Pompeio melior est, Caesar is better than Pompey, we see that the idea is “Caesar is removed from Pompey by a certain degree of excellence.”
proximi ex Belgis, the nearest of the Belgae.
Be suaque — consentirent. The indirect discourse after qui dicerent. Here the principal clauses have their verbs in the infinitive, the dependent clauses take the subjunctive. The direct form would be “We (permittimus) surrender ourselves (nos) and all our possessions (nostra) — we have not combined (consensimus) nor joined the conspiracy (coninravimus), and we are ready (parati sumus), etc. The rest of the Belgae (Belgae) are (sunt) in arms and the Germans (Germani) who dwell (incolunt) on this side the Rhine, have joined themselves (coniunxerunt) to them, and so great (tantus) is (est) their infatuation (furor) that we could not restrain (deterrere potuerimus) — our (nostros) kinsmen, who enjoy (utuntur) the same rights, and have (habent) one magistracy with ourselves (nobiscum), from conspiring (consentiant).
se suaque omnia permittere, surrender themselves and all their possessions. For the omission of the subject of permittere, cf. ii. 31, se suaque omnia eorum potestati permittere.
in fidem, to the protection.
2. paratos esse dare. Compare i. 44, paratum esse decertare.
3. oppidis recipere, to receive him into their towns. Object to be supplied, oppidis, abl. after recipere. The locative ablative, common with recipio.
cis Rhenum, on this side the Bhine.
sese — coniunxisse, had joined them. The student should note that joined here is an intransitive verb, while the Latin cannot tolerate coniungo without a direct object. Observe the difference, especially in putting English into Latin.
utantur — habeant. Observe the omission of the conjunction.
quin — consentirent, from uniting with these. See note on quin, p. 114,
L 12.
CHAPTER 4.
ab his, from these, i.e. the legati.
Bic reperiebat. Note omission of haec. This absolute use is like sic respondebatur, cf. i. 13, ita didicisse. The indirect discourse follows.
plerosque Belgas, the greater part of the Belgians.
Teutonos Cimbrosque. Compare i. 33, ut ante Cimbri Teutonique fecissent.
ingredi prohibuerint, prohibere always takes the infinitive in Caesar;
but what is the usual construction after v^fbs of hindering ? To understand the regular construction the pupil must see the construction from the Latin stand-
gitized by GOOgleN0TE8.
point. The Romans said 44hold off so that not” (quo minus). We say 44 prevent him from doing.” See Hints for Translating, pp. 325-26
solosque ease, qui—prohibuerint, in the direct discourse would be solique sunt, qui — prohibuerint, a relative clause of characteristic. Note the perfect tense of the direct discourse, although after secondary tenses.
magnosque spiritus. Compare i. 33, tantos sibi spiritus.
de numero. From the idea of separation and source in de came the notion of concerning. When we speak about a thing, that thing is the point from which all we say hangs. In our idiom what we say clusters about the subject.
habere explorata. This use of habeo denotes the idea of the participle as a possession. The Romans could not say 44 I have lost a horse ” (habeo amissum equum), for it would be nonsense to them to have a lost horse. It was only when the possessive idea was forgotten that such a verb became used as a simple colorless auxiliary. Compare coactum habere, i. 15.
omnia explorata. See note on habere obstrictas, p. 73,1. 14.
dicebant. Note the force of the imperfect.
quantam quisque, how great a number each one had promised.
cognoverint. Although after a secondary tense (dicebant), the original tense of the direct discourse is used to give force and power to the expression. Compare prohibuerint.
23. armata milia centum, one hundred thousand armed men. Compare i. 49, sedecim milia expedita. The degrading of the noun to the partitive genitive, e.g. sedecim milia hominum for sedecim mille homines, is the first step towards omitting the genitive entirely. Hence what was original)y the important word is removed, e.g. stratae viae became strata viarum, and finally strata (our street). Note that mille, when used as an adjective, is not declined, but when a substantive it has a complete plural.
electa, picked men. For gender, cf. i. 49, sedecim milia expedita.
2. cum — tum, not only — but also, cum is the acc. sing, neuter of the stem of the relative pronoun quo, while turn is from the pronominal stem to. The correlation is seen in such an expression as 44 during that time (turn) during which (cum),” i.e. when one act was going on (cum) another act was taking place at that time (turn); hence we meet not only one fact, but also another.
4. belli summam, direction of the war.
appellantur. Note the indicative because not connected with the speaker’s thought.
CHAPTER 5.
13. liberaliter prosecutus, having addressed kindly. Compare iv. 18, liber- aliter respondit, cohortatus prosecutus. Remember that the time of the
2 B
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYparticiple is bound to that of the leading verb. The action of cohortatus must have preceded that of iussit. If we should put into English 44 coming into Home, he spent the night,” we must use a circumlocution, such as a cum clause, to convey the proper time relation, but observe how convenient here are the perfect participles of deponent verbs.
quae omnia. Note how the Latin joins sentences into a great whole, by such links as the relative. Our idiom of course prefers the loose arrangement “ and all this.” The student must keep this in mind in putting English into Latin.
ad diem, promptly to the day. Compare v. 1, ad certam diem.
quanto opere — intersit, how much it concerns the state and their com• mon interest, that, etc.
distineri, be kept apart, manus — distineri, subject of intersit.
20. introduxerint, coeperint = in direct discourse, if they shall have lead, etc., future perfect.
^4. flumen Axonam. Such a verb as traduco allows two accusatives, one of which depends on the notion of the preposition (trarife), the other the simpie object.
117. 1. maturavit, with infinitive, cf. i. 1, maturat ab urbe proficisci.
quaeres—muniebat, this position fortified, etc. quaeres. The Latin word res is like ‘ an empty vessel.’ Into it is put the idea of the context. Should we render and this thing, we have a translation both slovenly and colorless, muniebat. This and the other imperfects show duration of the siege.
post — essent, the rear. Literally, what was behind him, post earn. Note the hyperbaton ; position emphatic.
tuta, predicate adjective, made safe.
5. in eo flumine. Note that English over cannot be rendered by trans in such an expression. The bridge is on (over) the stream, trans would imply it was on the other side, e.g. qui trans Rhenum incolunt.
munire iubet. Note the omission of the subject of munire, which is very common with iubeo when the subject is readily supplied from the context or emphasis is put on the action.
pedum. Genitive of measure.NOTES.
sions of likeness and unlikeness. The origin of this use lies in two independent sentences, e.g., “there is the same manner of siege of the Gauls and the same of the Belgae.”
14. oppugnatio, mode of besieging.
totis moenibus, ablative of place, along the whole of the fortifications. Compare vii. 2, turres toto opere circumdedit.
2. nulli. Note its emphatic position. There was not one who could get a foothold on the wall.
3. summa nobilitate, of the highest rank. Compare i. 18, summa audacia. Ablative of characteristic, a phase of the instrumental ablative, implying association. See discussion of the ablative under a Garumna, p. 66,1.10.
6. sustinere, absolute use, without object.
CHAPTER 7.
8. isdem ducibus usus, using the same persons as guides.
potiundi oppidi. Compare iii. 6, potiundorum castrorum. Note that potior, which requires a locative ablative, to be master in a place, takes the gerundive construction as if it were a transitive verb.
vicis aedificiisque incensis, when they had set fire to all the villages and buildings. Compare i. 5, vicos — aedificia — incendunt, morati, depopulati, can be used in the nominative, because they are deponent verbs; but note the change in construction when we come to incensis. Would there be any difference according to the English construction between depopulati and incensis ?
omnibus copiis. The instrumental ablative. The instrumental which the ablative represents is the case of association. See discussion of the ablative under a Garumna, p. 66, 1. 10. The phrase omnibus copiis is often used without the preposition cum in military expression.
ab milibus — duobus, less than two miles off. For amplius milibus, cf. i. 15, non amplius quinis — milibus, ab is used adverbially, cf. ii. 30, ab tanto spatio.
quae castra. Observe the repetition of antecedent. This is especially common in Caesar with dies, castra, locus. In later Latin such repetition is rarely found.
CHAPTER 8.
20. eximiam opinionem virtutis, their uncommon reputation for courage. Compare ii. 24, virtutis opinio est singularis.
2. quid — auderent, periclitabatur, he strove to ascertain what the enemy could do by their valor and what our men dared (to do). Tliis can be renderpd also, the valor of the enemy and the daring of our men. The Latin,
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book il
unlike the English, avoids the use of abstract nouns. In fact there are few such nouns that have equivalents in Latin. Either concrete nouns are preferred, e.g. a pueris, from boyhood, or a clause, e.g. permulta audent, great was their daring. See Hints for Translating, pp. 326-26.
loco idoneo, ablative absolute, expressing cause. The ablative absolute was nothing more than an instrumental or locative. In such expressions as this its true nature is seen. See note to eo deprecatore, p. 73, 1. 10.
6. tantum — quantum loci, spread over so much space as.
ex utraque parte, on each side.
et frontem — redibat, and gently sloping in front sank down gradually to the plain, frontem is the acc. of spec, with fastigatus.
21. si quo opus esset, = a future condition put into the imperfect subjunctive because dependent on possent. The quo depends on dud, inferred from duci possent, if there should be any occasion for them.
CHAPTER 9.
120. 2. hanc si nostri transirent hostes exspectabant, the enemy were waiting to see if our men would cross this. For si, cf. i. 8, si perrumpere possent, conati.
3. ut —aggrederentur, parati, they stood ready (for battle), in order to attack them, ut — aggrederentur is not dependent upon parati.
6. secundiore — nostris, the engagement of the cavalry being more favorable for our soldiers. For the ablative absolute, cf. chap. 8, loco — opportuno.
8. demonstratum est. See chap. 5.
10. ut — expugnarent, clause of purpose, introduced by eo consilio, with which it is in apposition. The secondary tense of the conclusion requires the imperfect possent and pluperfect potuissent in place of the future poterunt and future perfect potuerint. They will storm the fort if they can (if they shall be able); but if they cannot (if they shall not have been able), they will lay waste the lands.
CHAPTER 10.
pugnatum eBt. The impersonal construction. Such construction emphasizes the action at the expense of the actor. There was fierce fighting, without reference to those concerned therein.
hostes impeditos nostri in flumine aggressi, magnum eorum numerum occiderunt. For object with participle and verb, cf. i. 12, eos impeditos aggressus — partem — concidit, and i. 64, perterritos insecuti — numerum occiderunt.
22. neqt^e nostros—viderunt, and did not see our men advance to worse ground for the purpose of fighting.NOTES.
121. 2. optimum esse, that it was best, constituerunt admits of two constructions : an infinitive esse, with subject domum — reverti, and the purpose clause (ut) — convenirent. The sentence hangs in a balance between the notion of an indirect statement and that of purpose.
introduxissent. For future perfect, cf. potuissent.
8. his persuaderi — non poterat, was not possible to persuade these to stay longer, etc. Why must the impersonal construction be used with the passive of persuadeo ?	’
CHAPTER 11
11. magno cum strepitu. Note the emphatic position of magno: great was the noise. This is the regular position of the adjective before the preposition if emphasis is desired ; cf. summa cum laude. In some cases it almost becomes a fixed position ; but in the phrase ob earn rem, ob eas res, the preposition remains before the pronoun, in spite of quam ob rem, hanc ob rem.
cum sibl — peteret, since each was seeking for himself the first place in the journey.
fugae. Whether this is genitive or dative is impossible to determine, for Caesar says in vi. 27, harum est consimilis, but m v. 12, aedificia fere Gallicis consimilia.
speculatores, spies.
veritus. Note how convenient is the perfect participle of this deponent verb. Without it a cumbersome temporal clause would have been necessary. Although vereor is often inappropriate, and metuo (intelligent fear) would be preferable, yet the convenience of such a participle gave vereor an extended use in expressions of fearing.
hac re — Caesar—cognita. Observe how the subject Caesar is inserted in the very midst of the ablative absolute construction to show its interest in the expression : as soon as Caesar found out that the enemy was on the retreat.
17. castris continuit, castris without the preposition, a locative ablative especially common with verbs like tineo, recipio. Compare ii. 3, oppidis recipere.
19. his, i.e. equitibus, which is suggested by omnem equitatum. Compare
2, civitati persuasit, ut — exirent.
21. novissimos adorti, attacking the rear
23. ventum erat. See note to pugnatum est, p 120, 1 16.
cum — consisterent, while those in the rear, to whom our men had come up, were standing firm.
122. 1. priores, sc. et, and those in advance.
3. exaudito clamore perturbatis ordinibus, as soon as they heard the cry, they broke their ranks and put safety in flight
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book II.
quantum — spatium, as the length of the day allowed.
sub occasum, about sunset. The same difference that in has with the accusative and ablative is observed by sub. With the accusative sub has a vagueness of meaning, e.g. Livy, xxi. 16, sub idem tempus, about that same time (either before or after). In Livy, xxi. 18, sub hanc orationem, sub = after; but in xxi. 57, sub lucem, sub = before.
CHAPTER 12
8. ex terrore ac fuga reciperent, recovered from their terror and flight.
123. 1. Noviodunum, Novio — dunum, Newtown. The second member of this compound is the Gallic dunum, town or stronghold.
ex itinere, on his march. Compare i. 25, ex itinere nostros — aggressi; and chap. 6, id ex itinere — Belgae oppugnare coeperunt. The preposition shows how short was the interval between the march and the attack.
vacuum ab defensoribus. For the ablative see note to a Garumna flumine, p. 66,1. 10.
paucis defendentibus, though few were defending it.
ex fuga. See Inductive Studies, under Ablative. The order of words is the same as in vii. 24, omnis ex castris multitudo concurreret.
CHAPTER 13,
124. 1. obsidibus acceptis primis, having received as hostages the first men of the state.
qui cum. Observe how the relative serves as the connecting link, cf. ii. 5. quae omnia. The English ‘and they’ would generally be rendered not by et ii but by qui.
sese in eius fidem — venire. Compare vi. 3, in deditionem venire.
10. pueri mulieresque, women and children. Note that pueri does not mean ‘boys’ alone.
passis manibus. Compare i. 51, passis manibus flentes implorabant.
CHAPTER 14,
12. pro his — facit verba, Diviciacus speaks for these.
in fide — fuisse, have been on (terms of) confidence and friendship. civitatis Haeduae, with the Haeduan state. Objective genitive, impulsos. Note emphatic position. It was because they had been urged by their chiefs that they revolted.
indignitates. The plural denotes all kinds of insults.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
qui — fuissent, those who had been the movers of that plot. The antecedent of qui is eos to be supplied as subject of profugisse.
consilii principes = consilii auctores. Compare v. 54, principes belli inferendi ; vi. 4, qui princeps eius consilii fuerat; vii. 37, vel principes eius consilii fore profiterentur.
sua clementia, sua emphatic, that (accustomed) clemency of his.
in eos, towards them (the Bellovaci). The Haedui ask it for them ; hence in eos, not in se.
quod si fecerit. For future perfect (si feceris) in direct discourse. From here on we have in vivid narration the tenses of the direct discourse.
23. si — inciderint, sustentare consuerint. For si — inciderunt, sustentare consuerunt (present meaning = solent) in direct discourse.
quorum—consuerint, by whose aid and resources they have been accustomed to sustain themselves, whatever wars occurred, sustentare, in sense of sustentatum est, chap. 0, without object; or with object bella taken out of si qua bella inciderint.
CHAPTER 15.
125. 1. honoris causa, out of respect to.
quod erat. The conjunction is omitted (asyndeton) to bring out prominently the antithesis, he will spare them; but, because the prestige of the state was so great.
magna — auctoritate, of great influence. For the distinction between genitive and ablative of quality, see Inductive Studies.
nihil pati vini, they suffered no wine, etc. The subject (eos) of pati is omitted because easily understood from the context. Such omission is very common in the easy style of Caesar.
11. homines feros magnaeque virtutis, savage men and of great bravery. The genitive of quality, limiting homines in conjunction with the adjective feros. Compare v. 35, Balventio, viro forti et magnae auctoritatis ; and v. 54, civitas imprimis firma et magnae — auctoritatis.
14. confirmare. The omitted subject is eos, to which sese (the subject of missuros and accepturos) refers.
CHAPTER 10.
17. non amplius milia passuum decem. The student will see that the construction of milia is exactly the same as if amplius were not inserted. Such a use is an example of the loose and free construction (parataxis) which is found in all languages. It is really an insertion of an afterthought; a distance of ten miles, not more anyway.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book II.
trans id flumen. Observe emphatic position of trans, it was on the other side of this river where the Nervii were encamped.
consedisse, had encamped.
cum Atrebatis. Elsewhere this word is treated as a noun of the third declension, e.g. Atrebates, chap. 4 and 23 ; Atrebas, iii. 27 and 35 ; Atrebatibus,
21 ; Atrebatum, v. 46; Atrebatem, v. 22, vi.6; Atrebatibus, vii. 75 ; Atre- bati, vii. 76.
126. 2. quique, and those (eos, omitted subject of coniecisse) who seemed.
quo, adverb, where there was no approach. Although we use “ where” thus loosely in English, in Latin ubi {where) can never be used unless in an expression of rest. What would be the Latin for where I am staying; where I am going.
CHAPTER 17
8. eorum dierum—exercitus perspecta, having perceived our army's mode of marching in those days, eorum dierum limits itineris. For the accumulation of genitives, cf. vii. 76, universae Galliae consensio libertatis vindicandae et pristinae belli laudis recuperandae.
inter singulas legiones, between the several legions.
magnum numerum, a great quantity.
neque—negotii, and there would be no difficulty.
ut — auderent. Subject of futurum.
adiuvabat. Emphatic, weight was given to their advice, by the following circumstance.
quod Nervii, etc. Subject of adiuvabat.
ei rei. How is rei best rendered here ? They are weak in their cavalry, because even at this time they pay no attention to it. rei corresponds pretty well to the English colorless it. To translate that feature of military science is more elaborate than Caesar intended.
quo facilius, quo (whereby, the instrumental of the relative pronoun) is used for ut in purpose clauses where there is a comparative ; the instrumental ablative shows the measure of comparison, e.g. he came to oppose them the (i.e. by the fact of his coming) more easily.
teneris arboribus—posset, by cutting into and bending down young trees and {allowing) their numerous branches to shoot forth latei'ally (in latitudinem enatis), and by placing among them brambles and thorns, they had caused these hedges to present a fortification like a wall, so {dense) that it was impossible either to go into it or even to see through it. enatis, from enascor, quo = ut eo, and introduces a result clause.
instar (perhaps for the infinitive instar[e]; cf. exemplar[e]) takes the genitive dependent on the noun-idea; the equivalent of.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
ne perspici quidem. Note that the emphatic word is always between the ne and the quidem. The expression ne — quidem was stereotyped, while ne was the unrestricted negative as it was originally. So we find ne-queo (cannot), ne-scio, ne-fas. Non is for ne + oinom, not one = noenum = non; cf. nihil for nihilnm.
CHAPTER 18,
127. 1. baec, as follows. Compare i. 48, genus hoc erat pugnae.
quem locum. Compare i. 16, quibus itineribus.
ab summo, summo is here a substantive.
aequaliter declivis, with even slope.
ad flumen Sabim, quod. The antecedent of quod is flumen.
pari acclivitate. Ablative of characteristic. Such an ablative is really the instrumental, which the ablative represents. The instrumental denoted association. It is but a step from association to quality, or characteristic ; for what is constant association becomes the characteristic. The student should see that all such expressions as “ablative of characteristic” are something more than mere pigeon-holes in which a construction can be placed. The reason for the construction is the chief thing to explain.
adversus huic et contrarius, etc., facing this and opposite, clear at its hose for about two hundred paces.
ut non. How would negative purpose be expressed ?
secundum flumen, etc., along the river a few pickets of cavalry were seen.
videbantur, the true passive, were seen.
CHAPTER 19,
aliter se habebat ac, was otherwise than, aliter—ac, the origin of this use of ac in expressions of unlikeness goes back to the antithesis of sentences ; e.g. the order of march was in one way and the one which the Belgae reported was in a different way. Compare ii. 6, eadem atque.
consuetudine sua. Compare chap. 17, consuetudine itineris — perspecta.
legiones expeditas, unencumbered, i.e. without the hindrance of baggage.
totius. Emphatic.
proxime conscriptae, which had been last levied. The MSS. give both spellings, proxime and proxume. In Cicero’s time the scholars were in doubt whether to write imus or umus, since the sound was like that of the French u. Compare note on occupo, chap. 1. A character f- was invented in the time of Claudius and employed for a short season to represent this intermediate sound[book II.
between i and u. Cicero preferred amas, Caesar imus; and imus became the fixed form for the superlative.
in silvas. The plural denotes the different portions of the forest.
quem ad finem = ad finem ad quern.
128. 2. quod tempus — convenerat, which had been agreed on. Compare
36, quod convenisset.
adverso colie, up the hill. What is the literal translation ? Is the expression an ablative of place or an ablative absolute, and where does the idea of up come in ?
CHAPTER 20.
16. paulo longius, a little too far.
aggeris petendi causa, for the purpose of seeking (material for) the rampart.
qui — processerant. The antecedent of qui is the subject ii of arcessendi.
successus, approach.
his difficultatibus — subsidio, two things were of advantage under these difficulties.
129, 2. nisi munitis castris, until the camp was fortified. The ablative absolute, which in itself can express condition, is here accompanied by an explanatory nisi.
CHAPTER 21
7. quam partem — obtulit, whatever division chance presented to him. What is the translation of the reading quam in partem?
milites — quam utl, etc., having encouraged the soldiers in a speech not longer than (was required to bid them) remember, etc.
suae pristinae virtutis. Position of suae emphatic, the courage they have always shown.
12. quam quo telum adici posset, than (the distance) to which a missile could be cast. Compare iii. 13, neque propter altitudinem facile telum adiciebatur.
18. ad insignia accommodanda, for putting on their field badges, i.e. ornaments on the helmets, etc. See Introduction, 123, 1, b.
CHAPTER 22,
130. The chapter furnishes a good example of the periodic style so characteristic of the Latin. The English prefers independent sentences, the Latin dependent; hence the Latin period should be broken judiciously in translation into coordinate sentences.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY










































































at has the force of an adversative conjunction, but. The condition of the Romans has been described. We pass now to the enemy, at marks this transition.
in extrema spe salutis. Compare chap. 25, in extremis suis rebus.
virtutem praestiterunt, displayed courage.
lacentibus insisterent, stood upon those who had fallen. Supply iis with iacentibus.
ut ex tumulo, as from a mound.
non nequiquam, not in vain.
25. quae —facilia redegerat = quae facilia — reddiderat. Compare iv. 3, multo humiliores infirmioresjue redegerunt.
ex difficillimis, although in themselves most difficult. The ablative with ex shows that courage had removed these things from the category of difficult things, and made them easy.
CHAPTER 28,
134. 2. redacto, neuter singular, with two subjects (gente ac nomine) of different genders.
quos—dixeramus. Compare chap. 16, mulieres—in eum locum conie- cisse.
nihil impeditum, nothing was a hindrance.
vix ad quingentos, to scarcely five hundred.
usus misericordia. The ablative after utor stands for the instrumental which the ablative represents, e.g. avail himself of compassion,= use compassion, show compassion.
ut — videretur, videretur in the sense of the true passive of video, not seem, but be seen. In order that it might appear that Caesar used compassion toward, etc.
The use of the participle usus after videretur is patterned after a Greek construction.
uti iussit. iubeo, takes infinitive with accusative, but the accusative is often omitted when easily gathered from the context, imperavit takes ut — prohiberent because the subjunctive clause expresses the purpose of the command. Put into Latin (using impero), he ordered them not to cross the river.
CHAPTER 29.
de quibus supra scripsimus. Compare chap. 16.
ex itinere. Compare i. 25, ex itinere nostros — aggressi.
reverterunt — contulerunt. Note the asyndeton.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVE










































































[book III.
quae incolerent, incolere without object. Compare i. 1, qui trana Rhenum incolunt, incolerent, a part of the subjunctive clause uti — mitterentur.
imperata facere. Compare chap. 3, obsides dare et imperata facere, daturas — facturas. Feminine because the legati represent the nationes.
Note asyndeton.
inita proxima aestate, at the beginning of the following summer. Compare chap. 2, et inita aestate.
ob easque res. For position of the preposition, see note to magno cum strepitu, p. 121, 1. 11.
supplicatio, generally three or four days were the limit.
quod — accidit nulli, an honor which before that time had fallen to the lot of no one. quod refers to the idea contained in the clause dies — decreta est. Observe the emphatic position of nulli. Note that accidit is used in a good sense, although the verb usually implies misfortune. Compare contigisse, i. 43, and peius accidisse, i. 31.
BOOK III.
#
CHAPTER 1.
139. 1. proficisceretur. The position of the verb is emphatic: at the time of his setting out for Italy.
Galbam, later one of the murderers of Caesar, and great-grandfather of Galba, the emperor.
mittendi. Compare hiemandi below, and ii. 1, coniurandi.
iter, accusative. Subject of patefieri, which depends on volebat, iter per Alpes, the Great St. Bernard Pass, where in later times Napoleon crossed.
magno cum periculo. Observe the position of cum here and in magnis cum portoriis. Compare note to p. 74,1. 4. The danger was from the savage tribes.
secundis — proeliis factis castellisque — expugnatis, missis —legatis obsidibusque datis — pace facta. The student must render these ablative absolutes into the best English which will bring out the order of this series of events.
ipse. Agrees with Galba, the subject of constituit to be supplied.
in vico — qui vicus. Note the repetition of antecedent so common in Caesar. The Latin vicus was originally a dwelling, then it came to mean a collection of dwellings, village, unfortified, as distinguished from oppidum. Compare note to p. 134, 1. 16.
16. cum. Causal.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
CHAPTER 2,
140. 6. quam concesserat, outside of the indirect discourse.
id. Explained by the clause ut — caperent.
aliquot de causis. Particularized by (1) primum, first; (2) tum etiam, secondly (then also); (3) accedebat, in the third place, finally (it was added).
neque eam plenissimam, and that not entirely full.
commeatus petendi causa, to seek provision. Note the many ways for expressing purpose in Latin.
cum — decurrerent. The imperfect subjunctive would be the future indicative in direct discourse.
ne — quidem. For position of emphatic word, see note, p. 126, 1. 23.
accedebat. The subject is quod — habebant.
18. sibi persuasum habebant, they were persuaded; literally, they had it persuaded to themselves.
persuasum agrees with the clause Romanos—adiungere.
CHAPTER 3,
opus hibernorum. See Introduction, § 121.
de frumento reliquoque commeatu. Compare i. 39, first part of the chapter.
141. 1. satis esse provisum. Impersonal use; literally, had been sufficiently provided, i.e. sufficient provision had been made.
6. neque subsidio veniri (posset), neither could aid be brought.
maiori — parti placuit, it was the decision of the majority.
ad extremum = ad extremum casum. Compare chap. 5, also summo, ii. 18; angusto, ii. 25. In these cases we have the substantive use of the adjective.
CHAPTER 4
brevi—vix, both words emphatic. So short was the space that elapsed, that scarcely was time given. Compare i. 6, vix qua — ducerentur.
spatio = tempore.
constituissent, subjunctive by attraction.
his rebus conlocandis atque administrandis. The dative of the gerundive construction to denote purpose, a rare use in classical Latin. The usual construction in Caesar's time was ad with the accusative.
16. decurrere (et) conicere. Asyndeton. These verbs are historical infinitives. See note to ducere, p. 80, 1. 4. Others are repugnare, mittere, occurrere, ferre, superari.
gaesa. Ancient writers term the gaesum a Gallic javelin, generally of iron.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book in.
frustra. Note its important position between ullum and telum.
ut, as often as.
hoc. Explained by the rest of the sentence, quod, etc.
non modo = non modo non. The order is ac non modo facultas (non) dabatur defesso, etc.
relinquendi agrees with loci
CHAPTER 5.
142. 1. cum. Temporal. Explain the difference in tense in deficerent and coepissent.
imam esse spem. Observe emphatic position of unam: there was but
one hope.
milites certiores facit, he directs or commands. The meaning here is stronger than in “he informs his soldiers.” Compare Civil War, i. 64, ut certior fieret ne labori suo parceret.
CHAPTER 6.
quod for id, quod.
cognoscendi. The gerund depends on facultatem and has quid fieret
for its object.
sui conligendi, to recover themselves, sui is best taken, not as the genitive of the personal pronoun, but as the neuter of the possessive adjective suns, suum = one's own, one's interest, one's self. This is shown by the fact that the same stereotyped expression is employed irrespective of gender. Or sui may be explained as the genitive of the reflexive pronoun limiting conligendi, recovering of themselves. But such a genitive dependent on the gerund we meet with rarely in Latin ; e.g. poenarum sit solvendi tempus, time of paying penalties; eius videndi, of seeing her. The former theory, as remarked above, seems more reasonable.
commutata, emphatic position.
potiundorum castrorum. For gerundive construction of potior, see note to potiundi oppidi, p. 118, 1. 12.
circumventos interficiunt = circumveniunt et interficiunt.
143. 3. fusis and exutis are both in agreement with copiis, armis depends on exutis.
saepius, too often. The meaning of the clauses which immediately follow is that he had encountered things different from his expectation when he set out. alio se — viderat, remembered that he had come into winter quarters with one design, (but) saw that he had met a different state of affairs.
iginal fr
HARVARD UNIVERSITYCHAPTER 7.
atque ita, and accordingly.
profectus esset, cum is to be taken as belonging to this clause as well as to the preceding; hence the subjunctive.
adulescens. With proper names like our junior.
mare Oceanum, i.e. the Atlantic. The Mediterranean was mare internum, and by way of distinction this is called mare Oceanum. Compare
30.
hiemarat. Compare note to mandarunt, p. 76, 1. 10. v was often dropped between two vowels, e.g. sis for si vis. Even when written it was doubtless slurred over in pronunciation. On the other hand, i was doubled in sound ; so we find, for example, eius frequently written eiivs, as it was pronounced.
CHAPTER 8.
5. huius, emphatic position.
et in magno impetu, etc. The meaning is, that by reason of the great and unbroken violence of the sea, only a few harbors being on the coast and these held by the Veneti, they are naturally the masters of all who trade in that part of the world.
quos dedissent. For subjugation by Crassus, see ii. 34.
ut sunt, etc., since or because. The ut is causal and explanatory.
16. acturos — laturos, sc. se as subject.
mittunt, in pregnant sense. The idea of indirect discourse is gathered from legationem—mittunt.
suos, his.
sibi, to them.
remittat. In direct discourse what mood was used ?
CHAPTER 9.
2. longius, too far. Where was Caesar ? See beginning of chap. 7.
naves longas, ships of war.
6. cum prlmum — potuit. Note that the perfect indicative is used with cum primum. This is the regular construction as well as after simulatque and postquam. Compare cum primum, p. 114, 1. 7.
per anni tempus. Observe the use of per in the temporal expression. Such a use of the preposition prepares the way for the breakdown of the inflectional system.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book III.
in so, against themselves.
ad omnes nationes, ad, among, in sense of apud.
legatos—retentos—contectos. In apposition with facinus.
hoc, with»the greater hope on this account, or this (they do) with greater hope, because, etc.
pedestria itinera esse concisa and navigationem impeditam. Objects of sciebant.
nostros exercitus—posse. Object of confidebant.
16. diutius, very long.
iam ut, even though.
facultatem, slock.
19. longe aliam — atque, far different from.
in concluso mari, like the Mediterranean Sea.
22. naves—quam plurimas possunt, as many ships as possible. Compare
7, quam maximis potest itineribus.
CHAPTER 10,
146. 1. erant, emphatic.
multa. Its appositives are iniuriae, rebellio, defectio, coniuratio, and the clause ne—arbitrarentur.
retentorum equitum, in the detention of the knights. The participle retentorum conveys the leading idea. The student will observe this same thrusting into the participle the main idea of the clause in the stereotyped A. U. C., ab urbe condita, from the founding of the city. The tendency to avoid the abstract noun made this use of the participle more and more common (cf. Hints for Translating, pp. 326-6). We have the same thing in English, “after this painful life ended,” in the Book of Common Prayer.
equitum refers to Silvius, Velanius, and others, mentioned in chap. 8.
tot civitatum coniuratio, a conspiracy made by so many states.
hac parte neglect^, has a conditional force.
Bibi idem licere arbitrarentur, would think they had the same license.
CHAPTER 11
11. proximi flumini, cf. proximus mare, iii. 7.
adeat. Observe the omission of ut.
arcessiti (esse), {who were said) to have been invited. Note that dicebantur is used personally. This is the common construction in the passive for the present and imperfect, if the subject be in the third person.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
20. qui curet, to see to it.
Decimum Brutum, later one of the murderers of Caesar,
eo, i.e. among the Veneti.
CHAPTER 12,
147. 1. posita. In agreement with oppida implied in situs oppidorum.
pedibus, on foot, i.e. by land.
cum, as often as.
se incitavisset, had come in; literally, had roused itself.
navibus, by ships, i.e. by sea. In same construction as pedibus.
minuente, at ebb. Observe the intransitive use of minuo here.
adflictarentur, stranded. Subjunctive by attraction, as being part of the clause ut — haberent — neque navibus (haberent), while quod — accidit is the parenthetical statement of a fact.
his refers to aggere et mollibus.
suis fortunis desperare, despero is used intransitively with dative. The origin of this construction is seen when the true meaning, “give up hope,” (de + spes) is emphasized. So we find in i. 40 the construction with de: cur de sua virtute — desperarent.
cuius rei = quarum, i.e. navium.
11. eo, for this reason ; referring to quod — navigandi.
CHAPTER 13
namque (The Veneti do not have our difficulties in these waters), /or, etc.
factae et armatae, were built and equipped.
planiores, flatter.
excipere, to meet, to encounter.
148. 2. quamvis. In agreement with vim and contumeliam.
contumeliam, violence, buffeting.
transtra, etc., cross-beams (made) of timber (trabibus) a foot in thickness (altitudinem) were joined together (confixa) by iron bolts of the thickness (crassitudine) of a thumb (digiti pollicis).
eius usus. Does eius agree with usus or is it dependent on it ? Compare ea civitate for eorum civitate, i. 9; quae civitas, i. 10 ; qua spe, iv. 6.
tanta onera navium, ships of such weight.
posse. Its subjects are tempestates, impetus, onera. It has two complementary verbs, sustineri to be read with the first two subjects, and regi to be read with onera. All depend on arbitrantur.
praestaret, sc. classis as subject.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITY(.BOOK UL
reliqua, all other things.
pro, considering. See i. 2, last sentence.
illia refers to the Gauls.
nostrae, sc. naves.
his and iis refer to the ships of the Gauls.
16. copulis, by grappling hooks. accedebat. The subject is ut—timerent.
cum governs the verbs coepissent, dedissent. The next three verbs depend on ut.
ventus—vento, cf. in silvas — ex silva, ii. 9.
CHAPTER 14.
20. frustra, without result; explained by the rest of the sentence.
neque iis noceri posse, nor could they be injured. What is the literal translation ?
quae. Subject of convenit and visa est; its antecedent is classem.
149. 1. paratissimae, thoroughly equipped.
ornatissimae, finely provided.
nostris, sc. navibus, adversae. In agreement with naves.
neque satis Bruto — constabat, nor was it sufficiently clear to Brutus. The subject of constabat is quid agerent — insisterent.
noceri non posse, no injui'y could be inflicted.
has, i.e. the turres.
neque — et. Compare ii. 26, hostes neque—et. missa, sc. tela.
gravius, with more disastrous effect.
magno usui, of great service: the same sense of usus as in ii. 9, magno nobis usui; but cf. omnis usus below, where usus has the sense of 4 control.’
falces. In apposition with una res.
falcium. Governed by absimili, his, i.e. mural hooks.
cum, as often as. Used here with the indicative; but cf. chap. 12, first sentence.
atque eo magis. Compare i. 47, et eo magis.
nullum—factum, no unusually brave deed; literally, no deed a little braver.
CHAPTER 16.
cum, as often as. Compare chaps. 12, 14. singulas, one by one.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
binae ac ternae naves, ships by twos and threes.
contendebant, imperfect to show the continued attempts, quod. Subject of fieri and refers to last part of previous sentence.
27. ferebat, teas bearing, was blowing. Note intransitive use.
150. 1. malacia ac tranquilitas, calm and stillness. exstitit, stood out, prevailed.
quae res, this circumstance, i.e. the calm.
pervenerint, the perfect subjunctive in a result clause after a secondary tense. In such a use the sequence is independent of that of the main sentence, cum, since; explanatory of noctis interventu.
ab hora fere quarta, about ten o'clock in the morning. The day was divided into twelve hours from sunrise to sunset.
CHAPTER 16.
cum—turn, not only — but also. Compare note to p. 116, 1. 2.
navium quod ubique fuerat, all the vessels they had anywhere; literally, what of vessels had been anywhere.
quibus, these, i.e. the vessels.
vindicandum (esse), etc. The meaning is, Caesar thought that the more severe punishment ought to be inflicted on these for this reason, that, etc.
17. sub corona, under the crown, i.e. as slaves. Prisoners of war, when about to be sold into slavery, were crowned with chaplets. So it has been said, but the real origin of the expression is unknown.
CHAPTER 17,
19. quas—acceperat. Seechap.il.
151. 1. coegerat — clauserunt — coniunxenmt — convenerat: events which had happened before the arrival of Sabinus.
auctores, authors, i.e. to sanction the war. What is the etymological meaning of the English word * author ’ ? Compare augeo.
7. loco, locative ablative. When an attribute is used with loco the preposition is generally omitted.
castris sese tenebat. See note to p. 121,1. 17, kept himself in camp in a place suitable for everything.
cum. Concessive. Compare i. 14, cum ea ita sint.
pugnandi potestatem faceret. Compare i. 40, near middle.
non solum — sed etiam. Compare chap. 16, cum — turn.
in contemptionem veniret. Compare i. 18, in spem venire.
opinionem, impression.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSea causa. Explained by rest of the sentence.
eo, i.e. Caesar.
nisi — non. Compare i. 44, quod nisi rogatus non venerit.
CHAPTER 18.
quid fieri velit. Object of edocet
pro perfuga, as if he were a deserter.
quibus — proficiscatur. Object of docet.
neque longius abesse quin, it is not further off than the next night that Sabinus, etc., i.e. no later than the next night Sabinus should, etc. abesse quin. The quin in such an expression is equivalent to ut non introducing the notion of result, e.g. “it is not far from the case that.” Compare note to dubitandum, p. 114, 1. 12.
quod, this, i.e. the information given above.
amittendam esse — oportere. Asyndeton.
ad castra iri oportere, they ought to go against the camp. The studebt has already seen how frequent is the use of impersonal verbs, iri in this construction is especially common, e.g. Inscription from Capua (Cl. 1215). privatum: precario adeitur, private ground ; dangerous passing.
res. Its appositives are cunctatio, confirmatio, inopia, spes, and quod — credunt.
superiorum dierum Sabini. Double genitive. Compare ii. 17, eorum dierum.
152. 3. prius, with quam following, before.
ut explorata victoria, as if victory were sure. Compare v. 43, sicuti parta iam atque explorata victoria.
CHAPTER 19.
imo. See note on extremum, chap. 3.
passus mille. Note mille in agreement with passus. Compare note to milia expedita, p. 115, 1. 23.
exanimatique, que = and so.
ac terga verterent, but turned their backs, i.e. fled, ac after a negative clause is best rendered by but. See note on non potuerunt ac terga, iv. 35.
quos, these fugitives. Notice how frequently Caesar uses the relative at the beginning of a sentence where we use the demonstrative.
paucos, but few. Object of reliquerunt.
Sabinus, sc. certior factus est.
animus, disposition.
mens, mind.
Origirval from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
CHAPTER 20.
153. 3. ex tertia parte, as a third part.
4. paucis annis. Nothing is known of Valerios. The defeat of Mallius is usually assigned to 78 b.c. during the Sertorian war, in which some of the Gauls participated.
non mediocrem diligentiam. Compare i. 39, non mediocriter.
auxiliis equitatuque comparato. Note the singular participles with two subjects of different genders.
10. finitimae. In agreement with civitates.
13. quo plurimum valebant, in which they were very powerful. Compare
17, nihil possent and pedestribus valent copiis.
in insidiis, in ambush.
disiectos, while they were scattered.
CHAPTER 21
nostri. Subject of cnperent.
autem, while.
perspici. The subject is the clause quid — possent.
vertere. The short form of the third person plural of the perfect, which is rarely used in Caesar (Civil War, i. 51; iii. 63), but common in Sallust.
vineas turresque. See Introduction, 127.
alias — alias, now — again, at one time — at another. Compare ii. 29. 154. 1. cuniculis, mines or underground passages to undermine the Roman
agger.
cuius rei sunt longe peritissimi Aquitani, in which mode of warfare the
Aquitani are very expert.
2. aerariae secturae, copper mines.
CHAPTER 22,
devotis, substantive.
condicio, manner of living.
commodis — fruantur. The ablative after fruor is really the instrumental which the ablative represents ; i.e. enjoy themselves with.
amicitiae. Indirect object of dediderint.
qui. Subject of recusaret.
recusaret, subjunctive of characteristic, after such expressions as nemo est, implying non-existence, and est implying existence.
condicione, terms.[book III
CHAPTER 23.
oppidum. Subject of expugnatum esse.
1. ventum erat, they had come. Impersonal construction. See note to concedendum, p. 72, 1.4.
quoquoversum, in every direction.
citerioris Hispaniae, from the standpoint of the Romans.
finitimae. In agreement with quae. Which belong to [are of] hither Spain, nearest to Aquitania.
cum after magna. Note its position. See note on p. 139, L 7.
summamque, que = and so. See note on exanimatique, p. 152,1. 11.
quod. Explained by the clause suas — augeri.
animadvertit. Its object is quod, which is explained by copias diduci ; hostem vagari, obsidere, relinquere; frumentum commeatumque supportari; numerum augeri.
suas — hostem, emphatic.
14. in dies, daily.
cunctandum — quin, should not delay about fighting. Compare note to dubitandum, p. 114,1. 12, and abesse quin, p. 151,1. 23.
CHAPTER 24.
prima luce. See i. 22.
quid — caperent exspectabant, a loose use of the subjunctive to denote an action subsequent to that of the principal verb. We should expect capturi essent. Of course exspectare itself implies a future notion. Compare
39, quid ab his praecipiatur exspectant.
esse. Its subject is potiri.
infirmiore animo. This ablative of quality is equivalent to an adjective. For a like adjective phrase, see note on ex essedis, iv. 33.
27. sese castris tenebant. Compare note to p. 121,1. 17.
4. exspectari — iretur, they should hesitate no longer to go against
the camp.
exspectari — quin. See note to dubitandum, p. 114,1. 12, and abesse quin, p. 151, 1. 23. Observe the fondness for a passive infinitive after an impersonal verb; e.g. iri oportere, iii. 18.
ad hostium castra, the only reference in the Gallic War to a Roman attack on a Gallic fortified camp.
CHAPTER 26.
6. cum — cum. The first cum determines the mood of complerent, depellerent, and praeberent; the second cum, the mood of pugnaretur and acciderent
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
ad pugnam, for fighting.
lapidibus—subministrandis — comportandis. Gerundives expressing means.
pugnaretur. Impersonal. See note to concedendum, p. 72,1. 4.
CHAPTER 20.
quid fieri velit. Object of ostendit. -
erat imperatum. Impersonal. See note to concedendum, p. 72,1. 4.
intritae, from in, negative, and terere, to rub. Explain the use of this word ; that of the Eng. trite. .
21. prius — quam, before.
1. videri. Complement of possent understood.
quid — gereretur. Subject of posset.
5. desperatis omnibus rebus. What two constructions in the active after desperare has the student met? Compare note to suis fortunis, p. 147. 1. 8 Note the use of the passive, as if the active construction were desperare rem.
8. multa noote, late at night. Compare multo die, i. 22.
CHAPTER 27.
11. ultro, besides.
CHAPTER 28.
longe ac — Galli, in a far different way from the rest of the Gauls. See note to eadem atque, p. 117, 1. 18, and aliter se habebat ac, p. 127, 1. 11.
1. continentes silvas, unbroken forests. Explain the exact force of continentes from its composition.
8. longius, too far.
CHAPTER 29.
deinceps = almost an adjective continuis, successively, one after another. Compare v. 40, reliquis deinceps diebus, and Civil War, ili. 60, omnibus deinceps diebus. The adverb is inserted between the adjective and the noun as if in imitation of the Greek idiom which places an adverb between the article and the noun with the force of an adjective; e.g. 4 the present generation ’ is in Greek * the now men.’ For this adjective force of the adverb in an English derivative, see the word peninsula (paene -f insula).
ab latere, on the flank.
materiam, timber.
10. ipsi. Note asyndeton.
sub pellibus, under skins, i.e. in tents which were covered with skins.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYBOOK IV.
CHAPTER 1
1. qul fait—consulibus. This clause establishes the date. Pompey and Crassus entered upon their consulship on the first of January in the year 65 b.c. See Introduction, 22-25.
Gnaeo — Crasso. Observe the omission of the conjunction, as in i. 36, M. Messala—consulibus.
magna cum multitudine. For the position of the preposition, cf. i. 10, magno cum periculo.
a marl, from that part of the sea.
exagitati, having been harassed. Compare ii. 29, a finitimis exagitati.
premebantur—prohibebantur. Note the imperfects of continued action.
Sueborum gens. For position of Sueborum, cf. apud Helvetios, i. 2. See Introduction, 80.
13. anno post, the year after.
16. ratio atque usus belli, the art and practice of war. Compare ii. 20, scientia atque usus militum.
16. longius anno = diutius anno, longer than one year. Compare vii. 9, longius triduo. Does longe usually refer to place or time ? Compare longe and longius, iii. 28 ; longius, i. 22 ; longissime, i. 1.
1. maximam partem, for the most part.
lacte atque pecore vivunt. Compare v. 14, lacte et carne vivunt.
sunt in venationibus. Compare vi. 21, vita omnis in venationibus — consistit.
quae res, and this mode of life.
a pueris, from boyhood. Note how the Latin avoids the use of the abstract noun. Remember this in writing English into Latin. Compare note to quid — auderent, ii. 8, and Hints for Translating, pp. 325-6.
nullo officio — adsuefacti, having been accustomed to no semice nor discipline. Observe that the ablative follows adsuefacti, where in English we say '‘trained to a thing.”
7. locis frigidissimis, though their country is very cold.
vestitus, partitive genitive with quicquam.
CHAPTER 2.
ut quae — habeant, so that they have (persons) to whom they may sell those things which they have taken in war.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
11. quam quo — deciderent, than because they desire, etc.
13. impenso parant pretio, procure at a great price. Exact meaning of impenso ?
16. haec — efficiunt, by daily exercise they make these capable of great labor.
cum usus eat, when there is need. For this meaning of usus, cf. vi. 16, hi, cam est usus atque aliquod bellum incidit, omnes in bello versantur.
quamvis to be taken with pauci, although few.
vinum—arbitrantur. Cf. ii. 16, nihil pati vini—inferri.
CHAPTER 3.
161. 1. publice, as a community. Compare vi. 23, civitatibus maxima laus est, quam, etc.
3. una—a Suebis, in one direction from the Suebi.
6. fuit. Emphatic.
6. ut est captus Germanorum, as is the notion (captus being a noun) of the Germans, i.e. judged by the standards of the Germans.
moribus adsuefacti, cf. note to nullo officio — adsuefacti, p. 160, 1. 4.
redegerunt = reddiderunt. Compare ii. 27, magnitudo redegerat.
CHAPTER 4.
in eadem causa, in the same condition.
ad extremum tamen, at last however.
17. ad utramque ripam, on each bank.
20. transire prohibebant. For the construction with prohibere in this sense, see note to ingredi prohibuerint, p. 115,1.16.
CHAPTER 6.
162. 6. infirmitatem, fickleness.
nihil his committendum existimavit, thought that no confidence should be placed in them.
 est—consuetudinis, this belongs to Gallic custom, i.e. is a Gallic custom. 11. vulgus circumsistat — cogant. Notice the change in number caused
by the collective idea in vulgus. Compare i. 2, civitati persuasit, ut — exirent.
his rebus — permoti. Compare i. 37, quibus rebus — commotus.
 quorum — necesse est, of which they must repent on the spot. Compare
2.
16. rumoribus serviant, are slaves to idle reports. Compare vii. 34, bello servire.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYCHAPTER 6.
17. ne graviori — occunreret, that he might not encounter too serious a war. occurreret. Compare iii. 6, in bellum incideret.
163. 1. missas. Emphatic.
uti — discederent, to withdraw from the Rhine, i. e. to go farther into Gaul, omniaque, quae postulassent, — parata, indirect discourse after the idea
of a promise implied in the preceding, fore parata takes the place of the future passive infinitive, postulassent would be the future perfect indicative in the direct discourse.
qua spe adducti, influenced by the hope of this; literally, by which hope. qua spe = huius rei spe, as in i. 9, ea civitate = ex eorum civitate, and i. 10, quae civitas = quorum civitas, and v. 19, hoc metu = huius rei metu.
8. constituit, made known his resolve.
CHAPTER 7
quibus in locis. Compare i. 6, quibus itineribus.
a quibus refers to ea loca.
13. recusare — quin. Compare notes to dubitandum, p. 114, 1. 12, and abesse quin, p. 151, 1. 23.
15. resistere, sc. iis as antecedent of quicumque.
posse, sc. se.
possederint, come into possession of. For possidere in sense of potiri, cf. aer omne necessest — possidat inane, Lucret, i. 386.
concedere, are inferior.
neminem. Observe the emphatic position. Compare i. 3, quod aliud iter—nullum.
CHAPTER 8.
164. 1. quae visum est, what seemed proper, quae object of respondere
to be supplied.
3. verum, reasonable, just.
CHAPTER 9.
post diem tertium, the third day after (for tertio die). The Romans counted the day from which the period began as well as the day on which it ended. Hence the expression means 4 the next day but one.’
ne propius — moveret, that he should not advance nearer them.
hos—equites, they were waiting for this cavalry; literally, this cavalry was being waited for.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
CHAPTER 10,
ex monte Vosego = ex ea parte montis. Compare note to a mari.
p. 159,1. 5. monte means here a long mountain-chain ; see map. This reference is not in point considering the whole context in chap. 1.
parte quadam, a tributary.
neque longius milibus. Compare i. 15, amplius — senis milibus; also L 22, non longius — quingentis passibus.
citatus, with a rapid current.
165. 3. sunt qui, there are some who.
existimantur, not the subjunctive, because sunt qui is simply equivalent to nonnulli.
capitibus, mouths; elsewhere the word usually signifies sources.
CHAPTER 11
ut — constitutum. See chap. 9. Compare i. 22, ut erat praeceptum.
in itinere congressi = congressi cum eo, qui in itinere erat.
praemitteret, to send on. Observe the omission of the object.
sibi—faceret, that he would grant them permission.
ea condicione, the same terms.
fecisset. For two subjects with singular verbs, cf. ii. 26, quantoque in periculo et castra et legiones et imperator versaretur.
13. eodem illo pertinere. Compare i. 14, eodem pertinere.
aquationis causa, to get water.
frequentissimi, in as large numbers as possible. Note that frequens is not to be translated by its English derivative. The sense of crowded in the English frequent, a sense now obsolete, is seen in the following line from Ben J.onson • “ ’Tis Caesar's will to have a frequent senate frequens in the sense of saepe (cl. erat Romae frequens, Cicero) became more and more common, so that this meaning lived on in the Romance languages ; e.g. French frequent.
CHAPTER 12.
ubi primum = cum primum or simul ac.
amplius — equites, more than eight hundred cavalry. What other construction after amplius ? See chap. 10.
166. 5. rursus resistentibus, while our men in their turn made a stand. Supply nostris.
6. subfossis, from subfodere, stabbed underneath. Note asyndeton.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY[book IV,
7. ita perterritos egerunt. Note the force of per in perterritos. Compare
17, praecipites hostes egerunt.
vir fortissimus, vir generally follows the proper name.
amicus — appellatus. Compare L .3, & senatu — amicus appellatus.
atque, and so. Compare exanimatique, iii. 19.
CHAPTER 13,
per dolum atque insidias. Compare i. 42, ne per insidias — circumveniretur.
exspectare; subject of esse.
cognita — infirmitate, knowing the fickleness of the Gauls. For this meaning of infirmitas compare chap. 5, et infirmitatem Gallorum.
quantum — auctoritatis, how much influence.
167. 2. postridie eius diei. Compare i. 23.
Germani frequentes. Compare chap. 1, magna cum multitudine. Frequentes. For meaning see note to frequentissimi, p. 106, 1. 17.
5. sui purgandi causa, to acquit themselves. For the construction sui purgandi, see note on sui conligendi, p. 142,1. 15.
contra atque esset dictum, contrary to what had been said.
7. de indutiis — impetrarent, might obtain their request for a truce by deceiving (him). Compare v. 30, de sua ac militum salute impetrari posse.
CHAPTER 14.
12. quid ageretur, what was going on.
14. discessu suorum, by the absence of their chiefs.
perturbantur. The word is used in a pregnant sense. It is equivalent to they are so confounded as to be in doubt.
praestaret. Impersonal.
19. quo loco, in this place.
23. ad quos consectandos, to pursue them. Caesar's conduct in this matter is a specimen of the barbarity of his age. It shows the little value set upon human life when ambition was to be gratified. Plutarch tells us that this act was severely censured at Home.
CHAPTER 15.
168. l. clamore audito, hearing the outcry, i.e. of their women and children,who were being slain.
suos interfici, that their own families were being massacred.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITY




































9. rationem — instituit, he determined upon this plan of a bridge.
tigna, posts or piles. binay in pairs, sesquipedalia, a foot and a half thick, ab imo praeacuta, sharpened at the lower end. dimensa ad altitudinem, proportioned to the depth.
haec cum machinationibus — adegerat, when he had sunk (immissa) these into the river by means of engines and secured them there (defixerat), and had then driven them down (adegerat) with jammers.
1:1. sublicae modo, like a pile.
ut — procumberent, so as to incline according to the current.
contra — conversa, turned against the force and current of the river.
171. 1. haec utraque — distinebantur, these (two) pairs were kept apart
by timbers, two feet thick, laid on above (for two feet was the distance between the piles) with two ties at each end.
quibus — revinctis, these being kept apart and secured at opposite ends.
6. hoc artius, so much the more closely.
haec contexebantur, these were covered with timbers laid over them lengthwise.
ac nihilo setius, and besides all this.
et, also.
pro ariete, as a buttress.
aliae, sc. sublicae.
deiciendi operis, for the purpose of throwing down the work. The genitive expresses purpose as if causa or gratia had been employed. Such a genitive of the gerundive was in existence from the earliest period of the language and is best explained as the genitive of quality. This construction is especially common in late Latin. Compare Tac. Ann. ii. 69, Aegyptum proficiscitur cognoscendae antiquitatis.
CHAPTER 18,
172. 1. diebus decem, quibus, within ten days. Compare iii. 23, paucis diebus, quibus.
coepta erat comportari. Compare iaci coepti sunt, ii. 6.
3. firmo praesidio, strong guard. Compare i. 3, per tres — firmissimos populos.
liberaliter respondit. Compare ii. 5, liberaliterque oratione prosecutus.
respondit — iubet. Observe the change from the perfect to the present In Caesar’s mind it was the iubet that was more important.
institui coeptus est. Why is coeptus passive ?
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYviciB aedificiisque. Compare i. 6, vicos — aedificia incendunt.
si—premerentur. A subordinate clause in implied, indirect discourse, since auxilium suum pollicitus, promised his aid, is equivalent to promised he would give his aid (if), etc.
uti — demigrarent, etc. Purpose. This is what the messengers were to urge. After convenirent the advice ceases, and we pass to a mere statement; hence indirect discourse.
hunc esse — medium, this had been selected near the center. medium agrees directly with hunc. Compare vi. 13, regio totius Galliae media.
21. rebus is explained by the clauses ut — iniceret, ut — ulcisceretur, etc.
CHAPTER 20.
3. exigua — reliqua. Ablative absolute. Compare iii. 29, reliquis item civitatibus.
tamen in Britanniam — contendit. See description of Britain in Introduction.
omnibus — intellegebat, because he discovered that help had been furnished to our enemy from that country in nearly all the wars with the Gauls.
si tempus—tamen, even if time should fail, yet, etc.
si — adisset — perspexisset — cognovisset. Subject of fore.
Gallis — incognita, i.e. except the Veneti. Compare iii. 8, Veneti in Britanniam navigare consuerunt. According to ii. 4, Diviciacus once had the government, —tum etiam Britanniae imperium obtinuerit.
illo. Explain this adverb after verb of motion. Put in Latin “he goes there,’* “ he stays there ” (cf. homini illib nobilissimo ac potentissimo conlocasse, i. 18).
iis ipsis, i.e. mercatoribus.
contra Gallias, opposite to Gaul. The plural refers to the severe divisions.
15. quem usum, what skill.
poterat. Why the imperfect ?
CHAPTER 21.
idoneum, a suitable person.
Volusenum. See iii. 6; vi. 41; viii. 48.
navi longa, war ship.
4. ad Veneticum bellum. See iii. 9.




































NOTES.
in ulteriorem portum. Ambletense. See map.
hora quarta, about 8.30 o'clock in the morning. Compare iii. 15.
Britanniam attigit. Near Dover. See map.
dum — convenirent, until the rest of the ships should come there.
2. ut—administrarentur, as military science and especially the man- agement of ships require (since these have a rapid and uncertain movement) that all things should be performed by them promptly. Note the omission of nt with administrarentur and that postularent following ut, as, would be the indicative in direct discourse. Compare ut — ratio — postulabat, ii. 22.
sublatis ancoris, the anchors having been weighed, i.e. weighing anchor.
aperto ac piano litore, between Walmer and Deal. See map.
„	,	CHAPTER 24.
quo genere = quibus.
egredi prohibebant. See note on suos ingredi prohibuerint, ii. 4. Notice the force of the imperfect.
ignotis locis. Compare locis frigidissimis, chap. 1.
militibus — desiliendum, the soldiers had to leap down.
simul et — et—et, etc. Observe the repetition of the conjunctions (Polysyndeton). It brings out in vivid picture what must be done at once.
17. insuefactos, trained to this.
CHAPTER 25.
2. motus—expeditior. Compare, iii. 13, ut una celeritate et pulsu remorum praestaret.
naves—removeri, to be withdrawn a little. Obj. of iussit.
hostium — hostes. Compare castra — castris, i. 48.
6. quae res, this maneuver.
atque, and now.
qui — aquilam ferebat = aquilifer. The omitted antecedent of qui is the subjeci of inquit.
contestatus, calling upon.
ea res, his act, i.e., what he was about to do.
praestitero, I shall have discharged. The future perfect expresses here the promptness of the action.
cohortati inter se, exhorting one another. For inter se taking the place of the direct object, compare vi. 8, cum Galli cohortati inter se; and vi. 40, itaque inter se cohortati.
ex proximis — navibus = ii, qui in proximis navibus erant, ex iis (i.e. navibus) cum conspexissent. The subject of appropinquarunt is ii implied in ex proximis, (those) from the nearest.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYCHAPTER 26,
ab utrisque, on both sides; literally, by those on both sides.
ordines servare, keep their ranks.
alius alia ex navi, one from one vessel, another from another. quibus signis — se aggregabat, assembled about whatever standards he
met.
22. singulares, one by one.
178. 1. in universos, upon our collected forces. See universi—desiluerunt, chap. 25.
2. scaphas longarum navium, the boats belonging to the ships of war.
8. iussit — submittebat. Note the change in tense. The command was given once for all; the sending of aid was continuous.
4. simul = simul atque, as soon as. in arido. Compare chap. 24, aut ex arido.
CHAPTER 27
simul atque — receperunt. Compare ii. 12, priusquam—reciperent.
miserunt — polliciti sunt. Notice the asyndeton.
quae imperasset. The pluperfect subjunctive is for the future perfect indicative of direct discourse.
supra demonstraveram. See chap. 21.
oratoris modo, in the character of ambassador.
ut ignosceretur, that pardon might be granted.
in continentem. See note on confluentem, chap. 16.
22. remigrare in agroB, to retire to their country.
CHAPTER 28.
1. post diem quartum quam = quarto die, postquam. Compare
7, post diem tertium.
supra demonstratum est. See chaps. 22 and 23.
ex superiore portu. Compare chap. 23, in ulteriorem portum.
solverunt. See note on solvit, p. 176,1. 17.
aliae — aliae, some — others.
quae — solis occasum. Note the use of the adverb propius, and the
meaning of solis occasum. For the latter, cf. i. 1.
10. adversa nocte, in spite of its being night.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
CHAPTER 29.
Inna plena. Astronomical calculation fixes this time of full moon on die night of the 30tn of August, 55 b.c.
qui dies, which period (of full moon). Compare chap. 36, die aequinoctii.
 aestus mazimos, spring tides.	Remember that the Romans were acquainted only with the Mediterranean, whose tide is scarcely appreciable.
14. transportandum curaverat. See note on deducendum dedit, p. 175, 1.13.
id quod, a thing tohich. id is in apposition with the clause magna — facta.
quibus — possent. Subjunctive of characteristic.
quod omnibus constabat, because it was evident to all.
hiemari — oportere. Note the fondness for the passive infinitive with an impersonal verb.
CHAPTER 30.
1. principes. Subject of duxerunt.
2. convenerant. See chap. 27, principesque undique convenire — coeperunt.
quae hoc — augustiora, which was smaller on this account. See below.
6. factu. See note on perfacile factu, p. 68, 1. 2.
CHAPTER 31.
ex —discedere. Compare chap. 27, remigrare in agros.
ex eventu navium, from the fate of the ships. Compare viii. 23, quae Bellovacorum speculabantur eventum.
ex eo quod, from the fact that.
ad omnes casus, against every emergency.
 quae—naves, earum, of those ships which, etc.
quae — usui, whatever was of use.
19. reliquis ut — effecit, he brought it about that the voyage could be made well enough with the rest.
CHAPTER 32.
1. frumentatum. Supine.
neque ulla — interposita, no suspicion of war having arisen as yet.
hominum, i.e. the Britons.
Original from HARVARD UNIVERSITYventitaret, kept coming again and again. Note that the tense and the derivative ending combine to make this a double imperfect.
quam consuetudo ferret, than usual; literally, than custom brought.
id, quod erat, that which was really the case.
aliquid — consilii. In apposition with id.
armari, to arm themselves. The verb has a middle or reflexive force. The passive voice is a development of the middle, denoting the action upon the subject. A verb of this kind shows the easy transition to the passive. A survival of the middle voice is met with in the deponent verbs utor, fruor, etc., and the ablative after them is explained as an instrumental ablative; e.g. vescor carne, I eat meat; literally, / support myself by means of meat.
12. aegre sustinere, to stand their ground with difficulty. For sustinere used absolutely, cf. ii. 6, sustinere non posse, and chap. 11, at end.
conferta legione. The ablative absolute is best translated here by. a coordinate clause : he saw that the legion was crowded together, and that weapons, etc.
CHAPTER 33,
genus — hoc pugnae, their method of fighting from chariots is as follows.
ex essedis is a prepositional phrase which is taken with pugnae almost in the sense of an adjective, ex essedis pugnae, chariot fighting. Compare v. 13, omnes ex Gallia naves = omnes Gallicae naves.
21. cum se—insinuaverunt, when they have worked themselves in among the troops of cavalry. For the use of cum with the indicative see note on cum esset, p. 113, 1. 1.
182. 3. ita mobilitatem — praestant, thus they display the speed of horse and the firmness of foot in battles.
incitatos equoB, their horses at full speed, brevi, in a moment.
per temonem percurrere, run along the pole.
CHAPTER 34.
eius adventu. Compare iii. 23, quorum adventu.
hostes constiterunt, nostri — receperunt. For the asyndeton, cf. i. 18, concilium dimittit, Liscum retinet.
ad lacessendum. Observe the omission of the object.
alienum tempus, an unfavorable time.
16. quae — prohiberent, so as to keep our men in camp and hinder the enemy from fighting.
sui liberandi, of freeing themselves. What part of speech is sui ? See note on sui colligendi, p. 142, 1. 15.
quanta — daretur. Indirect question after demonstraverunt.
Original from
HARVARD UNIVERSITYNOTES.
CHAPTER 35.
183. 1. idem—lore, the same thing would occur iohicht etc.
ut—effugerent. In apposition with idem.
de quo ante dictum eat. See chap. 21.	'
ferre non potuerunt ac terga verterunt, were not able to bear, but turned their backs. For this use of ac, et, and que after a negative clause, compare chap. 36, non potuerunt et paulo infra delatae sunt; also iii. 19, ne unum quidem nostrorum impetum ferrent ac statim terga verterent; and
4, non destitit tamen atque in agris habet delectum. Our idiom requires the adversative conjunction.
tanto spatio — quantum, as far as; literacy, over as much space as.
CHAPTER 36,
10. legati — de pace venerunt. Compare i. 27, Helvetii — legatos de deditione— miserunt; ii. 6, qui legati de pace — venerant; chap. 27, legatos de pace miserunt.
die aequinoctii, the time of the equinox, i. e. September 24. Caesar may have left the island, as Napoleon III. suggested, about September 12.
13. hiemi navigationem subiciendam, that the voyage should be exposed to foul weather.
17. quos reliqui, as the rest, reliqui for reliquae, since Caesar had in mind those in the ships rather than the ships themselves.
paulo infra. In the middle of the English Channel the current runs east, while along the shore of France it sets in westward.
portus capere, to reach the port. Compare chap. 26, cursum tenere atque insulam capere.
et—delatae sunt. See note on ac, chap. 35, ac terga verterunt.
CHAPTER 37
quibus ex navibus, i.e. the two transports mentioned in chap. 36, onerariae duae.
22. non ita magno, not very large.
circumsteterunt, sumounded them. For the omission of an object, compare i. 48, si qui — deciderat circumsistebant.
184. 2. ad clamorem, at the cry.
5. amplius horis quattuor. What other construction does Caesar often use ? Compare note to amplius, p. 125, 1. 17.
7. postea — quam = posteaquam by tmesis.