p. 1. i Gallia omnis\ ‘Gaul as a whole*, that is, the country from the Rhine to the Pyrenees, more extensive than the modern France: the provincia is of course excluded.
Bclgae\ the word is said to mean ‘plunderers*. We learn from II. 4 that most of the Belgae were of Germanic origin. They must be regarded as at basis a Gallic people, but with much admixture of foreign elements: the Belgian, says M. Desjardins, is the German grafted on the Gaul: ‘ Belgium has always been nothing more than a thoroughfare (* un pays de passage’) and always will be so’.
Aquitani] the Aquitani belonged to the Iberian race; they are said by Strabo to have differed in language from the Kelts and Belgae, and to have resembled the Iberi in appearance and in language. The political division of Aquitania organised by Augustus, comprising the whole of Gaul south of the Loire and west of the Province, must be distinguished from the ethnographic Aquitania of which Caesar is here speaking; the boundaries of the latter are the Ocean, the Garonne in its upper course, M. Corbieres and the Pyrenees: the Bituriges Vibisci situated in the angle between the Garonne and the Ocean, having Burdigala (Bourdeaux) for their chief town, were not Aquitani. It has been supposed that the prae-Keltic inhabitants of Britain were of Iberian origin, and so akin to the Aquitani and to the modern Basques. Cf. Rhys, Lectures on Welsh Philology, Lect. IV.
Cdtae\ the terms Galli, Galatae, Celtae are used indifferently by the ancient writers. In ordinary usage the Gauls are treated as a subdivision of the great Keltic family. The Gauls differed from the Belgae in their physical characteristics, the latter being tall, with light hair and eyes and elongated skull, while the Galli were shorter, with hair and eyes of a deeper hue and brachycephalous skull.
provincial the exact date of the constitution of the province of Gallia Braccata afterwards called Narbonensis from the town of Narbo Martius (founded by L. Licinius Crassus, B.c. 118) is uncertain. Zumpt
Digitized by (jOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. I.
attributes its organisation to the year ioo, Mommsen to 120 or 121. The Roman conquests on this side of the Alps were begun by the Consul Q. Opimius, who was summoned to aid the Massilians against the Ligurians in 154. The boundaries of the province when fully constituted were the Alps on the east, the Cevennes and the upper course of the Garonne on the west, the Rhone from Geneva to Vienne on the north, and the Mediterranean and the Pyrenees on the south.
ad eff. an.pertinent] * tend to enervate the mind ’.
11 Helvetii] a Keltic people whose limits corresponded nearly to those of modern Switzerland: cf. note on 2.
cum...gerunt] atm is strictly temporal: ‘when they are either keeping them out of their own territory or themselves waging war in theirs’. If cum were causal prohibeant and gerant would be used.
14. eorum] of the Gauls generally.
ab Sequanis] ‘on the side of the Sequani’. For this use of ah, cf. Roby, § 1813.
Sequanis] the domain occupied by the Sequani extended from the Saone and the Rhone as far as Strasbourg.
vergit ad septentriones] Caesar describes its position in reference to the Roman province of Narbonne. ‘It lies in a northerly direction’. Either the singular septentrio or the plural septentriones may be used: for the meaning of the word see note on IV. 20.
p. 2. 2 earn partem] the gulf of Gascony.
Chap. 2.
Orgetorix] the name occurs on coins in the forms Orgetirix; compare however the names Dumnorix, Ambiorix, etc.
M. Messala et M. Pupio Pisone coss.] B.c. 61. Kraner remarks that et is usually omitted between the names of the two consuls as in 6 and elsewhere.
nobilitatis] ‘the nobles’: abstract for concrete.
exirent] civitas though singular is really a noun of multitude and therefore equivalent to a plural; hence the plural exirent.
praestarent] the verb conditioning the oratio obliqua is dixit implied in persuasit, hence the imperfect praestarent, though praestent might have been used, the clause cum...praestent being made contemporaneous with esse.
hoc] * for this reason’, quod * that*.
una ex parte] on the north and east, the Rhine flowing northward
till it reaches the lake of Constance. It will be seen that Helvetia corresponds approximately to Switzerland, leaving out all or most of the cantons of Valois, Ticino and Grisons.
qua ex parte] * in which respect’.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGqui...patebant] ‘now they extended*. The clause contains an ex
planatory statement of the writer and forms no part of the thought of the Helvetii. We do not know in what direction Caesar intends his measurements to be taken: from Fort de l’ficluse on the Rhone to the junction of the Aar and the Rhine is just 180 Roman miles, and from Fort de l’ficluse to Bregenz on the lake of Constance is 230 miles. (Walckenaer ap. Long.)
The reasons assigned by Caesar for this migration of the Helvetii seem inadequate. Cuno (Vorgeschichte Roms; Theil I., die Kelten) pertinently asks how it is that the Helvetii do not appear to have come to any understanding with the Romans, their southern neighbours, before starting, whereas they did enter into negotiations with other neighbouring peoples. He suggests that there may have been some diplomacy on Caesar’s part which he thought it desirable to conceal. Certain it is that their evacuation of their home and subsequent destruction left their country an easy and a valuable acquisition to the Romans.
Chap. 3.
carrorum,] carnis is a latinised form of a Keltic word; it is the English ‘car*, which in Mandeville’s Travels is spelt ‘carre*. (Prof. Skeat, Etym. Diet. s. v.)
sementes facere] sementem facere is quoted from Cato de re rustica: compare the proverbial expression: ut sementem feceris ita metes ‘ as you sow, so shall you reap*. Cic. de Or. 11. 261.
28 sibi suscepit] ‘took upon himself*. Cf. Cic. p. Cael. 37; Verr. v. 152; Fam. v. 8.
30 regnum] by regnum must not be understood an absolute or hereditary monarchy. Caesar applies the term loosely sometimes to the usurped authority of some powerful chieftain who was wealthy enough to maintain a large armed retinue, sometimes to a recognised and in a certain sense legitimate headship. Cuno thinks that there may have been a Keltic word ‘rex’ or ‘rix* denoting some kind of authority. The word principatus is equally vague; in vn. 4, as Kraner points out, it is distinctly opposed to 7’cgnum as a lower to a higher grade of power. For more information on the subject the student should consult Desjardins, Geographic, II. 544 sqq., and Cuno, Vorgeschichte Roms, I. 37 sqq.
33	Dumnorigi]	his name is spelt Dubnorix or Dubnoreix on several
coins and medals.
p. 3. 1 Aeduo] the Aedui were a powerful Keltic tribe dwelling between the Loire and the Saone. They were on terms of friendship and alliance with the Romans.
ut conaretur persuadet] persuadet being an historical present may have an imperfect in the subordinate final clause; contrast this with 5 persuadent Rauricis ut proficiscantur.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANDE BELLO GALLICO.
perfacile factu]	the supine in u is properly the ablative of a noun
of the fourth declension, so perfacile factu = ‘ very easy in the doing*.
io	Galliae potiri] the only passage in Caesar where potiri takes a genitive (Kraner). Possibly imperio should be inserted; see appendix..
Chap. 4.
poenam] poenam is the subject, damnatum the object, of sequi ; ut igni cremaretur is explanatory of poenam: ‘ it was proper that the punishment of being burnt should befall him if condemned*.
causae\ this may be either genitive or dative. See note on concilio 30.
familiam] ‘household*, ‘establishment*.
clientes obaeratosque] the clientes were originally freemen who from the pressure of debt or from other circumstances had surrendered themselves into slavery to the chieftains or nobles (principes). ‘The words client and debtor are almost synonymous*. Ihne, Hist. I. no.
ne causam diceret] ‘to avoid standing his trial*.
\11	sibi niortem consciverit] this is the usual term for suicide.
Chap. 5.
ut exeant] this clause is explanatory of facere, and the ut may be translated ‘namely to’: ‘they attempt to do that which they had determined on, namely to quit their territory*. The idiom is of frequent occurrence. Cf. Cic. de lege agr. I. 9 quod homines sancti non facient, m pecuniam accipiant,
oppida] ‘ strongholds’: vicos ‘villages*.
domum reditionis] — domum redeundi: domum ‘homewards* is used after the noun reditio as it would be after a verb of motion such as redire. This must be distinguished from such instances as quid me tactiost in Plautus where me is the direct object of the verbal notion implied in the noun tactio. Kraner qu. Cic. div. 1 68 reditum ac domum itionem.
essent] for ut essent after comburunt cf. n. on 3 ut conaretur persuadet.
mensum] the form mensium is also used.
domo efferre] domo ‘from home’ is almost adverbial, hence the preposition is not required; cf. domo exire 6 and 12, and contrast above e finibus exire. Cf. my n. on iv. 14.
Rauricis] the colonia Rauricorum subsequently founded by Munatius Plancus was at or near Augst on the left bank of the Rhine, east of Basle. The Raurici extended into Alsace. Desjardins shows from the funeral inscription of Munatius Plancus at Gaeta that the spelling Raurici is to be preferred to Rauraci.
Tulingis] the exact position of this tribe has not yet been satisfactorily determined.
Latobrigis] Desjardins places this tribe on the north bank of the Rhine, between Basle and Schaffhausen.
Original from ERSITY OF MICHK33 eis] for this use of the demonstrative in place of the reflexive pronoun cf. n. on 6 suos fines.
Boiosqtte] the Boii occupied no very definite limits at this time; they seem to have been feeling the force of the various influences, so difficult now to determine, which were stirring the vast savage hordes of Europe and impelling them to their incessant and restless wanderings.
p. 4. i Noreiam] Noreia, now Neumarkt in Carinthia, a little above lat. 47°. It was here that the Cimbri won a victory over Cn. Papirius Carbo, B.C. 113. Mommsen III. 181 (Engl. Trans.).
Chap. 6.
itinera duo, quibus itineribus] this redundancy of expression is quite in Caesar’s manner and will often be met with again.
Sequanos] the Sequani were situated between the Rhine where it turns eastward at Basle, the Saone, the Rhone and M. Jura. One of the possible routes into Gaul, Caesar says, lay through their territory, and to enter this the Helvetii would have to pass between the Jura and the Rhone along a defile which reaches its narrowest point at the Fort de l’ficluse, about 13 miles from Geneva, built in the xivth century to command this entrance into France. No route from Helvetia into Gaul across the Jura seems to have been known, to the Romans at any rate, at this time; at present the Jura may be crossed at several points. It is not quite clear why the Helvetii could not have gone by the Trouee de Belfort.
vix qua singuli] for the position of vix cf. II. 28 vix ad quingentos.
Allobrogum] the Allobroges, or Allobriges as Strabo calls them,
occupied a district corresponding roughly to the modern Dauphine and Savoie. They had been, as Caesar says, ‘pacified ’ in the year 61 B. c. by the praetor C. Pomptinus; cf. Liv. Epit. cm. C. Pomptinus praetor Allobrogas qui rebellaverant ad Solonem domuit: the position of Solon or Solonium is uncertain.
vado transitur] at present the Rhone is said to be fordable only near the villages of Russin and Cartigny, about 9 miles from Geneva.
bono animo viderentur] the omission of esse is noticeable: ‘because they did not seem as yet to be friendly disposed to the Roman people ’. The clause is a subordinate one in oratio obliqua, hence the subjunctive viderentur.
suos fines] observe that the reflexive suos is used here not of the subjects of the principal verb existimabant but of the Allobrogfes, while eos denotes the Helvetii: cf. eorum in VII. 1 priusquam eorum clandestina consilia efferantur used in reference to the main subject of the sentence. Drager Hist. Synt. § 29 b quotes a number of similar passages from Caesar.
qua die...is dies] dies is frequently feminine when used in the sense of ‘date* or ‘appointed time’. Cf. 8; vn. 3; B. C. m. 33» etc.
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. I.
17 Z. Pisone, A. Gabinio cossi] 58 B.C. L. Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus was Caesar’s father-in-law. In the previous year, 59 B. c., Caesar then consul had married Piso’s daughter Calpumia, and had given his own daughter Julia to Pompey. Neither Piso nor his colleague A. Gabinius were persons of reputable character if we may trust the invectives of Cicero in his speech for Sestius.
Chap. 7.
Caesari cum] the sentence would have been more regular if Caesar
had written Caesar, cum, etc.: at present the subject of maturat, viz. Caesar, has to be supplied from the dative Caesari. The transposition of cum is not uncommon in our author.
7i	ulteriorem]	‘further Gaul’, that is, Gaul beyond the Alps as
opposed to Gallia cisalpina, the Gallic province on the Italian side.
pervenit]	Plutarch says that he arrived on the eighth day after
leaving Rome. It is not known for certain by what route he travelled.
provinciae imperat] imperare in the sense ‘to order a person to furnish’, ‘to requisition’, takes a dative of the person of whom the demand is made, and an accusative of the person or thing demanded.
nullum] notice the emphatic position of nullum at the end of the sentence.
rogare] sc. se which is omitted here and elsewhere in similar sentences, ‘that they asked {se rogare) to be allowed to do this with his permission’. For eius voluntate cf. 30, 35, etc.
Z. Cassium] the Epitomiser of Livy, Epit. LXV., says Z. Cassius consul a Tigurinis Gallis, pago Helvetico, qui a civitate secesserant in finibus Allobrogum (Mommsen writes Nitiobrogum) cum exercitu caesus est. milites qui ex ea clade superaverant obsidibus datis et dimidia rerum omnium parte ut incolumes dimitterentur cum hostibus pacti sunt. This was in 107 B.C.: the defeat probably took place in the department of Haute Savoie. Orosius says that Cassius had pursued the Helvetii as far as the Ocean when his army was entrapped, but this is probably a mistake. Valois proposes usque ad Rhodanum for usque Oceanum. Cf. Desjardins II. 240.
sub iugum missum] the iugum consisted of two spears fixed in the ground and surmounted by a third placed crossways; under this the conquered soldiers were made to walk.
Chap. 8.
p. 5. 7 qui influit] for the rather strange statement that the lake flows into the river, instead of the river into the lake, Kraner qu. vii. 57 perpetuam paludem quae influeret in Sequanam. Mommsen remarks that Caesar regards the lacus Lemannus as the source of the Rhone.
9 milia passuum decem novem] 19 Roman miles, that is, 2 7 or 28 kilometres, is just the distance from the lake to the Pas de l’£cluse in a
JNIVERSITY OF MICHIGstraight line. The distance following the bend of the river is, judging from Baron Stoffel’s report, 32 kilometres; hence Desjardins, who corrects Napoleon’s error in saying that the distance, following the river line, was 28 kilometres, errs himself when he says that the distance by the river line is at least one-third more than the distance in a straight line. Napoleon shows that there is no need to suppose the line of fortification to have been continuous from the lake of Geneva to the pass: for some distance the ground on the south bank is too precipitous to require any artificial strengthening; there were only five points where such defensive works were necessary, one opposite the village of Russin, the others at or near the villages of Cartigny, Avully, Chancy and Cologny. It has been conclusively shown by Napoleon and Baron Stoffel that by murus fossaque must not be understood a wall in the ordinary sense of the term, flanked by a ditch, but by murus Caesar means simply the scarp of a fosse, dug along the steep face of the hill; the scarp of such a ditch would naturally be nearly or quite twice the altitude of the counterscarp. The whole extent which Caesar had to fortify is according to Baron Stoffel 5000 metres = 3 miles 18S yards: this work might have been accomplished in two or three days.
reverterunt]	reverti, not reversus sum,	is used as the perfect of re
vertor.
ea spe deiecti] cf. v. 48 opinione deiectus: ‘foiled of this hope*.
alii vadis] the sentence would have been more regular if another alii had preceded navibus iunctis: ‘the Helvetii crossed partly (alii) by rafts, partly (alii) by fording’, but Caesar begins by saying that the Helvetii crossed or attempted to cross by means of rafts and then as an afterthought adds that some crossed by fording.
19 operis munitione'] munitione would have done by itself; operis munitione serves better to balance militum concursu, telis is not, I think, to be connected with militum.
Chap. 9.
unaper Sequanos via] ‘ only the route through the Sequani’. This is the naiTow defile between the Rhone and the Jura, now called the Pas de l’£cluse.
sua sponle] ‘on their own account’. Cf. Cic. Ep. Fam. vii. 2 magnum quiddam spectavit, nec sua sponte, sed eorum auxilio qui me stante stare non poterant. Caes. B. G. v. 28.
24 eo deprecatore] ‘with him to plead their cause*, abl. abs. Notice impetrarent without an object: ‘gain their request ’.
Sequani, ne] dare obsides ‘ give hostages ’ is equivalent in sense to
‘give pledges’, and is therefore naturally followed by ut or ne with subjunctive : tr. * the Sequani binding themselves not to hinder the march of the Helvetii*.
Chap. 10.
p. 6. 2 Santonum] the Santones dwelt on the coast north of the mouth of the Garonne; the province of Santogne and the town of Saintes on
P. C. I.	5
GOOQle	Original	from
UNIVERSITY OF MICDE BELLO GALLICO.
the Charente receive their name from them. They can scarcely have been within 100 miles of the Tolosates, from whose borders Caesar says non longe absunt. The Tolosates dwelt in the neighbourhood of Tolosa, Toulouse. (Addenda.)
T. Labienuni\ Labienus was one of Caesar’s most able and trusted officers: in the civil war he joined the side of Pompey.
duas legiones] the xith and xnth.
tres, quae circum Aquileiam hiemabant] the Vllth, Vlllth, and ixth ; the legion which he already had with him in Gaul (cf. 7) was the xth.
Aquileiam] Aquilee, situated on the coast at the most northern comer of the Adriatic in the district of Venetia.
proximum iter] the. route adopted by Caesar has been much disputed. Napoleon’s view is that Caesar, after leaving Turin, proceeded along the valley of the Chiusone through the village of Usseau (Ocelum), then across the Col de M. Genevre to Brian5on and Grenoble on the frontier of the Vocontii, where he would have to cross the Isere, and thence to Lyon. Desjardins, however, perhaps a better authority, places Ocelum at or near the village of Drubiaglio on the Dora Riparia, about 20 miles eastward of Segusio (Suse): this would be a more direct route from Turin to M. Genevre.
12	Ceutrones]	thus, and not Centrones, should the name be spelt.
They are placed by Desjardins between the northernmost bend of the Is&re and Brian9on. In Napoleon’s map they are put more to the north-east.
Graioceli] Desjardins places this tribe on the east slope of the Alpes Graiae, between them and Ocelum (Drubiaglio). The Alpes Graiae are the chain connecting the little S. Bernard (M. Graius) with M. Cenis. Napoleon places the Graioceli along the left bank of the Isere.
Caturiges] this tribe, whose name may survive in the village of Chorges, seem to have occupied the right bank of the Durance not far from Embrun.
compluribus his proeliis pulsis] the order of the words is a little confusing: ‘these having been beaten in several engagements’.
Vocontiorum] the Vocontii extended from the Rhone to Brian£on: the place here alluded to by Caesar is probably Grenoble.
Segusiavos]	they must have occupied a part of the departments of
Rhone and Loire: from vii. 75 we learn that they were clientes of the Aedui. (Addenda.)
Chap. 11.
24 liberi eorum] liberi sui would have been more in accordance with the oblique structure of the sentence.
Aedui Ambarri] this tribe was settled on the right bank of the Rhone in the department of Ain; a trace of their name may still survive in the village of Amberieux. Ambarris should in all likelihood
Digitized by GOOglCbe read for Ambivaretis in the list of the clientes of the Aedui given in vii. 75.
Allobroges]	it will be remembered that the Allobroges occupied the
region lying between the Isere and the Rhone; from the present passage we learn that they had some detached settlements on the right bank of the Rhone.
30 fuga se recipiunt] ‘betake themselves in flight’, different from ex fuga se recipere, for which see vii. 20.
sibi nihil esse reliqui] ‘they had nothing left*; cf. Sail. Cat. 28 quibus lubido atque luxuria ex magnis rapinis nihil reliqui fecerat.
Santonos] in 10, if the reading be correct, Caesar wrote Santonum
from Santones; here all the best MSS have Santonos.
Chap. 12.
p. 7. 1 Arar] the Sa&ne. In the fourth cent, it bore the name Sauconna, afterwards Saogonna or Sagona, whence the modern Saone. The extreme slowness of the stream is mentioned by the Latin poets, lentus Arar Claudian xvn. 53; tacitoque liquore mixtus Arar, Silius Ital. v. 451: cf. Desjardins I. 162.
transibant] Napoleon, with whom A. von Kampen agrees, fixes their point of crossing at Trevoux, a few miles north of the junction of the Rhone and Saone. He makes their line of march after leaving the Pas de recluse pass through Culoz, Virieu-le-grand, Tenay, Amberieux. Desjardins is disposed to put the point of crossing higher up, near Macon, on the ground that the Helvetii would not have ventured to cross so large a river with six Roman legions occupying the neighbouring heights (supposing them to have been encamped at Sathonay as seems probable), and that, had they been so near to him, Caesar would not be said to have learnt their movements by means of scouts.
reliquam] in sense quite equivalent to relictam; this usage of reliquus is by no means rare. Cf. v. 52.
de tertia vigilia] the Romans divided their night from sunset to sunrise into four vigiliae (watches) of varying length according to the season of the year. Cf. 21.
in proximas silvas abdiderunt] in with the accusative is used because a verb of motion is implied: they went to the woods and hid themselves in them.
Tigurinus] of the four pagi, into which the Helvetic state was divided, Caesar only mentions two by name, the Tigurini and the Verbigeni (27). Desjardins supposes that the other two were .the Raurici and the Tulingi, cf. n. on 5. (Addenda.)
L. Cassium] cf. note on 7.
sive inmortalium] compare Caesar’s allusion to the interference of heaven in human affairs in his answer to Divico 14. Mr Froude perhaps goes too far in saying ‘His own writings contain nothing
5—2
Digitized by Google6o	DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. I.
to indicate that he himself had any religious belief at all. He saw no evidence that the gods practically interfered in human affairs. He never pretended that Jupiter was on his side. He thanked his soldiers after a victory, but he did not order Te Deums to be sung for it*. Caesar, p. 493.
10 L. Pisonis] the consul of 58: cf. n. on 6 end.
Chap. 13.
pontem] the construction of Caesar’s bridges is explained in my n.
to iv. 15. Of course a bridge of much slighter texture than that which Caesar constructed on the Rhine would suffice for the Saone.
cum intellegerent] ‘understanding as they did*.
ut flumen transirent] explanatory of confecerant ‘that which they had accomplished’, etc., ‘namely the passage of the river’. See n. on 5 ut exeant.
bello Cassiano] this was in 107; Divico then must have been 70 or
80 years of age at this time.
30	faceret...iiuros] in or. rect. si...facit...ibunt...ubi...constituerit.
32 perseveraret] sc. Caesar.
p. 8. 3 tribueret] this absolute use of tribuere is to say the least unusual: in the passage quoted by Schneider from Cic. Fam. xiii. 9 plurimum is read after tribuerim by Wesenberg and Kayser: in the phrase plurimum tHbuere, which is common enough, is plurimum an adverb or an accusative after tribuere? With the present passage Kraner cf. dabat famae, Tac. An. I. 7.
ut magis virtute] had Caesar written ut non dolo contenderent aut insidiis niterentur, the sense would have been perfectly clear; it would seem that having intended to write this he changed his mind and substituted magis virtute quam dolo for non dolo, thus leaving the connexion of the last words aut insidiis niterentur rather ambiguous. See appendix.
intemicione] ‘annihilation’: the word properly means ‘mutual slaughter’; it is common in the phrase ad internicionemt e.g. bellum ad intemicionem gestum est. Cf. II. 28.
Chap. 14.
his] * sc. legatis (cf. 34 ei legationi respondit), not neuter, in which case Caesar would have said ad haec as in 36, II. 32, etc.’ Kraner.
10	teneret] the past tense is conditioned by the perfect respondit:
teneat would have been equally correct.
12 qui si] ‘ and if it’, i. e. the Roman people.
quod ji] ‘ suppose that I am willing to forget a bygone insult, can I also put away the recollection of recent wrongs, the wrong of attempting to force a passage through the province against my will, the wrong of harassing the Aedui, the Ambarri, the Allobroges?’
Digitized by GoogleNOTES.
tg	deponere posse] num deponere possum in or. rect. becomes in or. obi.
num {se) deponere posse: for memoriam deponere cf. B. C. II. 28 ne primam sacramenti memoriam deponerent.
impune iniurias tulisse] the student should notice here that iniurias ferre does not mean ‘ to suffer wrongs ’, a meaning which the phrase often has, nor ‘to inflict wrongs’, a meaning which it never has, but the words impune ferre must be taken closely together and mean ‘ to go unpunished for *. iniuriae here are of course wrongs inflicted and not wrongs suffered.
eodem pertinere') ‘tended in the same direction*, ‘pointed to the same thing’, i.e. to their approaching punishment, as Mr Long rightly explained it.
secundiores res] for the sentiment here expressed Kraner refers to the lines of an unknown tragic poet quoted by Aristotle Rhet. 11. 23 § 20
TToWoiS 6 dalfJLCJV OV KCLT ctivOKLV <ptpU)V | fieydXcL dlduxrut eUTVXTj/AdT, a\\*
tva I rds av/x<popas X&ftuxru' hn<pave<jTipas.
26 de iniuriis satisfaciant] ‘give satisfaction for’, the same phrase occurs again in v. 1.
it a institutos esse] didicisse is used in a similar sense in 13; ita se a
patribus maioribusque suis didicisse ut, etc.
Chap. 15.
32 castra movent] Napoleon thinks with great probability that the Gauls, after crossing the Saone, followed the line of the subsequent Roman road from Lyon to Autun, which was no doubt only an improvement of an old Gallic road. This route would take them through or ' near Belleville, Avenas, Cluny, and St Vallier, where it is supposed that they quitted the Autun road and turned westward, passing through Issy l’Eveque, Remilly, etc. to Mont Beuvray, near which the decisive battle was fought: cf. 21 sqq. Heller, however, -with whom Kraner agrees, follows de Saulcy in placing the site of the decisive battle near Ivry and Cussy-la-Colonne about 16 or 18 miles N.E. of Autun. In this neighbourhood a number of graves have been found which from various indications are judged to be those of the Helvetii who fell in the battle. Heller makes the Helvetii quit the Saone valley somewhere above Macon (cf. 16) and march into the Charolais hill district, thence north-eastward towards Ivry, passing to the east of Autun. See the case fully argued by Heller in Philol. XIX. 557 sqq., XXVI. 657 sqq.
p. 9. 4 alieno] ‘unfavourable’.
sublati] ‘elated by’. Cf. v. 38 hoc victoria sublatus; B. C. II. 37 quibus rebus omnibus sublati.
in praesentia] Kraner says that praesentia is here the n. acc. pi. of praesens; I believe it to be the abl. sing, of praesentia: the phrase occurs again B. C. I. 30.
ita] ita is not the antecedent to uti, which itself does duty here for ita uti. Tr. ‘and so they marched for 15 days, in such a way that’, etc.DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. I.
quinis aut senis] the distributive numerals are used to express the notion that on each day the distance between the two forces was only 5 or 6 miles.
Chap. 16.
essent polliciti] this sentence is quoted by Prof. Kennedy, Gram. § 191, as an instance of ‘virtual sub-oblique’ construction, flagitabat implies that Caesar reminded the Aedui of their promise, hence the mood of polliciti essent
frigora] ‘ the cold *, not cold at any particular time, but cold seasons generally, hence the plural. The country was undoubtedly colder in the time of Caesar than it is at the present day; increased population and cultivation have a warming effect upon climate.
diem ex die ducere] diem ex die is probably briefly put for in diem ex die ‘ from day to day *, and ducere is used absolutely for tempus or rem ducere, or is eum to be supplied, cf. in the next sentence se duci? Such expressions as mora dies extrahente B. C. I. 32, triduum extrahitur 33, might be quoted in favour of taking diem as an acc. governed by ducere.
conferri, comportari, adesse] the Aedui said first that the corn was being collected (conferri), then that it was on its way (comportari), by and by that it was close at hand (adesse).
23	metiri] Kraner asserts on insufficient grounds that metiri here and in
23 is to be taken as a passive: this use of the word seems to occur only in very late authors.
26	vergobretum] the word means ‘judgment-dealer’, being derived from
the Gallic vergo, Kymric guerg, old Irish ferg (ejflcax) and Irish breth, Gallic brath (indicium). Desjardins is wrong in saying that this office was peculiar to the Aedui, for the title has been found on a coin of the Lexovii in Normandy (Cuno, Vorgeschichte Roms I. 39).
tam necessario tempore] ‘at such an urgent crisis’. Cf. vii. 32, 40, necessaria res B. C. I. 40.
Chap. 17.
p. 10. 4 quod debeant] sc. conferre. See appendix.
dubitare] cf. n. on 7 rogare.
necessariam rem] ‘an urgent matter’. See appendix.
Chap. 18.
iactari]	* noised abroad ’.
quaerit] ‘inquires into’, ‘asks about’. So below, eadem quaerit.
liberius atque audacius\ these are real comparatives, ‘more outspokenly and boldly i. e. than he had before.
ipsum esse Dumnorigem] ‘that it was Dumnorix and no other’. summa audacia * a man of boundless audacity ’.
portoria] dues on imports and exports. These dues were farmed as at Rome; that is, the right of collecting them was sold by auction to the
Original from 5ITY OF MICHhighest bidder: a certain sum was thus guaranteed to the State while the difficult task of collection was left to individual enterprise. The person or persons thus empowered collected the dues by means of agents and retained whatever surplus there was over and above the sum guaranteed to the public exchequer. Dumnorix by means of intimidation had for many years secured the right of farming the various branches of the revenue for a small sum and had thus enriched himself at the expense of the State. When we read that a Gallic chieftain could sometimes summon 10000 armed retainers it is easy to understand the intimidation practised by Dumnorix.
posse]	‘to have power* or ‘influence ’ = potente?n esse. The adverb
largiter is rare in classical prose authors; it occurs in B. Af. 72.
nuptum collocasse] ‘had bestowed in marriage in (lit. ‘into’) other states
cupere] cupere alicui— ‘to desire a person’s good’. Fore. qu. Cic. Ep. Q. F. I. 2. § 3 quid) ego Fundanio non cupio ? non amicus sum ?
suo nomine\ * on his own account \
p. 11. 1 si quid accidat RomanisJ * in the event of anything happening to the Romans ’, i. e. if the Romans meet with disaster.
imperio] ablative of attendant circumstances, cf. R. § 1240 sqq. ‘ In case of the supremacy of the Roman people ’.
in quaerendo\ 1 in the course of his enquiry’. quod=i whereas’.
proelium equestre adversum\ proelium equestre form as it were one word, ‘a cavalry-engagement*, and adversum is the adjective qualifying it. Cf. n. on vn. 36.
factum\ the repetition offactum is a mark of carelessness. Cf. 38, v. 35; VII. 20.
Chap. 19.
10	quod] * the fact that \
12 iniussu suo et civitatis] ‘ without his (Caesar’s) orders and the State’s ’. initissu is properly the ablative case of a noun iniussus, but no other case is ever used.
cotidianis] * everyday i. e. ‘ordinary *.
C. Valerium Procillum] the son of a Gaul named Caburus who had been presented with the Roman citizenship by C. Valerius Flaccus, whence he took the name of Gaius Valerius Caburus. Cf. 47, vii. 65 new edition.
cui summam] 1 in whom he had the most absolute confidence *.
25 simul\ the simul connects commonefacit with et ostendit, ‘he at once reminds him...and informs him ’.
27	sine eius offensione animi] ‘without any offence to himself’, i.e. Divi
tiacus ; ‘ without letting his own feelings be hurt ’.
Digitized by GOOglC64	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm.	I.
28*	statuat] lit. *he (Caesar) begs...that he himself should decide’, etc.,
but to make good English we must say ‘ that he himself should be allowed to decide ’, or ‘ he begs for permission to decide Kraner qu. B. C. I. 26 ut ipse (Caesar) cum Pompeio colloqueretur ...postulat.
Chap. 20.
33 domi] ‘ in his own land here opposed to in reliqua Gallia, as in 18 to apud finitimas civitates.
p. 12. 2 nervis] cf. our use of the word ‘sinews’ to denote resources or strength as in the common (and, according to Bacon, trivial) saying ‘money is the sinews of war’, which is taken apparently from Cic. Phil, v. 5 nervos belli pecuniam infinitam; cf. Tac. Hist. H. 84.
sed] observe the omission of etiam, so in 43 non modo...sed. Lewis and Short (Lat. Diet. s. v. sed) remark * sed standing alone isolates the ascending idea, while an appended etiam, et, or quoque places it in closer connection with the first statement, and thus permits them to be viewed together ’.
existimatione vulgi] ‘ public opinion ’ or ‘ the esteem in which the people held Dumnorix ’.
a Caesare] accidisset is treated as if it were a passive verb: tr. * if any severe measures should be taken against him by Caesar ’.
10 tanti esse ut] for the various meanings of tanti est cf. R. §§ 1192, 1193. Caesar’s word to Divitiacus expressed in or. rect. would be ‘your friendship is of so great a weight with me that I overlook the wrong done to the state and my own resentment in consideration of your goodwill and entreaties’. Cf. below praeterita se Divitiaco condonare, lit.
‘ he makes a present of all that is past to Divitiacus ’, i. e. ‘he overlooks all that is past to please Divitiacus
Chap. 21.
20 sub monte] perhaps M. Tauffrin, a hill four kilometres to the west of Issy l’Eveque.
23 legatum pro praetore] the legati were appointed by the senate to take the field under the orders of the general in command; they were of senatorial rank and in some cases received the status and functions of propraetor.
25 quid sui consilii sit] cf. VII. 77 quid mei consilii est ? consilii is the genitive of ‘ divided whole R. § 1296.
Chap. 22. *
ipse] * while he himself*: the adversative particle autem is omitted here as often elsewhere.
p. 13. 1 equo admisso ad eum accurrit] * gallops up to him ’.
2 voluerit]—voluisti in the exact words of Considius.
Digitized by GOO£*lCNOTES.
Labienus]	It was the forces of Labienus which Considius mistook
for Gauls. Caesar, though he had also taken up his position on a hill (copias in proximum collem subducit) evidently could not see the hill held by Labienus, for it was only later in the day that he learnt from scouts that Considius’ report was false, and that it was the Romans and not the Gauls that occupied the hill in question.
9 multo die] 4 when the day was far advanced ’, so mulio mane, multa nocte, ad multam noctem, 26. r i	timore perterritum] the ablatives timore and metu are frequently thus
joined with the participle perterritus, with which they almost coalesce into a single word; cf. our 4 panic-stricken \
12	quo consuerat intervallo'] about 5 or 6 miles ; cf. 15, end.
castra ponit] Napoleon supposes that the Gauls had now ad
vanced as far as Remilly, a village on the Alene, and that Caesar pitched his camp near Ternant on the Cressonne, about three miles from the enemy. But if Heller’s view be adopted (cf. n. on 15), we must suppose that the Helvetii followed by Caesar were somewhere between Chalons and Autun, possibly near Chagny.
Chap. 23.
biduum supererat cum] 4 it was two days to the time when it was needful for them to distribute the com’, metiri need not be passive here any more than in 16, where see note.
Bibracte] this Gallic oppidum was situated on M. Beuvray, about 10 miles to the west of Autun.
mil. pass. XVIII] about 16 miles.
fugitivos] runaway slaves, Kraner, who quotes Liv. fragm. XCi. transfugas liberos vivos ad se adduci iussit, fugitivos...ip sis imperavit ut interficerent.
decurionis] decurio is properly the officer in command of a decuria of cavalry.
Chap. 24.
27 animum advertit] Caesar seems to use animum advertere and animadvertere indiscriminately.
in colie medio triplicem aciem instruxit] The four legions were drawn up in a triple line along the side of the hill, that is, each legion consisted of three lines, these lines being so arranged that the first consisted of four, the second of three cohorts, and likewise the third. The two new legions with the auxilia were placed on the top of the hill. Napoleon, followed by A. von Kampen, has selected as the locality of the battle a spot where two hills of slight elevation are separated by a valley, through which runs a small stream called la Roche, issuing from the Alene which flows in a westerly direction about a mile to the south of the spot in question. On the eastern of these two elevations, situated between the villages of le petit Mari^ and le grand Marie, he supposes the six legions to have been placed, and the cavalry on the other side of the brook. The Helvetii descending
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANde bello Gallico.	[Comm. i.
from the western elevation (marked in the map la Garde Chateau), drove the cavalry across the brook and advanced up to the Roman lines, sub primam nostram aciem successerunt. A. v. Kampen places the carri and impedimenta of the enemy on another slight elevation north of la Garde Chateau. Between these two hills and over the hill on which he supposes the Romans to have taken their stand runs an old road leading to Bibracte. De Saulcy and Heller (as before stated in n. on 15) consider the battle to have been fought between Ivry and Cussy. I have thought it right to state the views of Napoleon, Kampen, and others on the subject of this and other localities, though one sometimes feels inclined to agree with the observations of M. Desjardins on the extreme uncertainty, if not the inutility, of these topographical identifications when they rest on such slender data as Caesar here condescends to give us.
veteranorum] on the text of this passage see the appendix.
p. 14. 2 qui in stiperiore acie constiterant] the two legions who were posted on the top of the hill.
5 phalange] a term borrowed from the Greek military tactics: it denotes a close compact body of infantry.
Chap. 25.
ad pugnam impedimento\ this use of ad after words .denoting‘hindrance * is not uncommon ; cf. VII. 10 magnam difficultatem ad consilium capiendwn afferebat; 26 etc.
pilorum]	‘ the shaft of the pilum was 4^ feet long, and the barbed
iron head was of the same length, but this extended half way down the shaft to which it was attached with extreme care, so that the whole length of the weapon was about 6ft. gin.’ S. D. A. The head which seems to have sometimes terminated in a barbed point was sufficiently flexible to bend in piercing the shield or armour of the foe, which rendered it difficult to extricate. The first rank of the Helvetian phalanx covered themselves in front with their shields, while the hinder ranks probably held theirs in a slanting position over their heads; it would thus be easy for the pilum when strongly thrown to transfix two or more of these scuta.
cum\ ‘ inasmuch as the iron point had bent’.
multi tit] the ut is transposed as cum occasionally is; cf. 43 ex equis ut colloquerentur.
nudo corpore] nudus simply means without defensive armour: ‘unprotected’.
mons] probably la Garde Chateau: see above 24.
mille passuum] mille is an indeclinable noun, corresponding here to an adverbial accusative case. Drager Hist. Synt. I § 57 quoted from Cato Origines 1, indeest ferme mille passuum, mille is not governed by circiter. Notice suberat ‘was at hand’, the sub expressing proximity. Caesar might equally well have written aberat.
Boii et Tulingi] they were encamped somewhere to the north of theCapp. 24—26]
battle-field, and so attacked the Romans on the flank as they were pressing the enemy over the hill; hence ex itinere ‘on their way’, i.e. while going in pursuit of the main body of the Helvetii.
latere aperto] on the right flank, the shield being held in the left hand.
conspicati] conspicor is ‘very frequent in Plautus and Caesar, several times in Terence; elsewhere rare; never in Lucretius, Cicero, Vergil or Horace*. (L. and S.)
conversa signa bipartito intulerunt] ‘changed their front, and advanced to the attack in two divisions’. For conversa signa cf. II. 26. It is impossible now to discover the exact nature of the manoeuvre here alluded to.
victis ac submotis'] the Helvetii, who had been routed, but were now returning to the encounter, venientes are the Boii and Tulingi.
Chap. 26.
ancipitiproelio] anceps proelium is an engagement in which fighting goes on on different sides; ‘a double engagement’, cf. vn. 76.
diutius cum] diutius gains additional emphasis by being put before cum; cf. below diu cum esset pugnatum.
alteri] the Helvetii, the second alteri denotes the Boii and Tulingi.
30 hora septima] about 1 p. m. cum is concessive, and may be translated * althoughR. § 1730.
p. 15. 2 carros rotasque] almost = the wheels of the cars. (Addenda.)
mataras ac tragulas] ‘ pikes and javelins ’. matara is a latinised form of a Keltic word. Caesar seems to mean that some of the enemy sheltered themselves behind or under the wagons, and thrust their pikes out (subiciebant) through the wheels.
eaque tota node] ablative of duration of time, cf. Cic. p. Sulla 17 eo tempore omni where Mr Reid remarks that it is the addition of omni as here of tota that gives the idea of duration: see note on biduo B. G. v. 48.
nullam partei?i] accusative of duration of time. Some have supposed the words nullam...intermisso to be merely a marginal explanation of continenter.
Lingonum] the chief town of the Lingones, Andematunnum, afterwards called Lingones after the name of the tribe, is the modern Langres in the department of Haute Marne.
die quarto] Napoleon, on what grounds I do not quite understand, asserts that the Helvetii stayed their flight at Tonnerre, a town on the Arman^n. In the expression die quarto, the day of the battle is probably reckoned in; thus, if the battle was fought on Monday, they reached their destination on Thursday. The distance from the battlefield, supposing it to have been close to M. Beuvray, to Tonnerre is between 00 and 70 miles.
10 triduum morati] this inability of the Romans to follow for three days seems to show that they had been severely handled.qui si iuvissent] Madvig Adv. II. 246 proposes to write qui iuvissmt on the ground that qui is unnecessary in a hypothetical enuntiation such as si iuvissent, but Kraner compares 44 qui nisi decedat...sese ilium non pro amico sed hoste habitumim. The omission of eos or illos, the object of habiturum, should be noticed; in the passage just quoted from 44, the object ilium is inserted.
Chap. 27.
*4 omnium rerum inopia] * utter destitution*.
17	suppliciterque] ‘ and in suppliant tones besought him with tears for
peace’.
atque...iussisset] one would have expected atque cum is iussisset.
*9 eo] that is, to Tonnerre, supposing Napoleon’s identification to be right.
2 Verbigenus] one of the four pagi or cantons of the Helvetii: cf. n. on 12.
Chap. 28.
^9 sibipurgati] ‘clear of blame in his sight*.
3o in hostium numero] in might have been omitted as in v. 27, and elsewhere.
P* 16. 2 copiam facerent] 'supply them with com’: copiam facere was a common colloquial expression in the sense of ‘give an opportunity’, e.g. Plaut. Capt. 742 ut mihi eius facias conveniundi copiam.
8 petentibus Aeduis] this is probably an abL abs., though it might be taken as a dative after concessit.
*0 quibus] quibus and the following quos had better be resolved in translation into ‘and’ with the demonstrative pronoun, ‘and to them they gave’...* and admitted them’.
in parent] * into a similar status of right and liberty as they enjoyed themselves’. Kraner remarks that as the Helvetii are represented in VII. 9 (end) as still dependants of the Aedui, the equalisation here spoken of cannot have been bestowed on them till after the rising of Vercingetorix. This then would be an argument in favour of the -view that Caesar’s history was not composed, or at all events did not receive its final shape, till after the end of the Gallic campaigns.
Chap. 29.
12	litteris Graecis] probably in Greek characters, but not in the Greek
language. Cf. v. 48.
nominatim] ‘expressly’, * with full particulars’.	<
ratio...qui numerus] ‘ a calculation of the numbers that’, etc.
summa] notice that summa is followed by two distinct genitives, rerum and capitum, ‘ now of all these divisions the sum amounted to 263000 heads (we should say * souls’) of the Helvetii’, etc. Cf. n. on numerus below.NOTES.
fuerunt ad milia CCCLXVIII] Caesar might have written fuit agreeing with summa, but has preferred to make the verb agree with milia which, it should be observed, is in the nominative case, Shaving lost its prepositional force, and being used adverbially = * about’. Cf, U- 33 occisis ad hominum milibus IV.
eorum numerus.. .milium] numerus here like summa above is followed by two genitives: ‘the number of those who...was found to consist of 110000’.
Chap. 30.
totius fere Galliae] Caesar probably means Keltic Gaul.
25 Helvetiorum iniuriispopuli Romani] Helvetiorum is the subjective, populi Romani the objective, genitive after iniuriis: ‘injuries inflicted by the Helvetii on the Roman people’. Cf. 31 Ariovisti iniuria ‘injury done by Ariovistus’, so v. 20 iniuria Cassivellauni.
ex usu accidisse] it should be noticed that accidere is not always used of unfavourable events, though it will generally be found to denote an unforeseen or unfortunate occurrence. Cf. IV. 22 satis opportune accidisse; Cic. Ep. Att. I. 5 omnia quae tucunda accidere possunt accidebant. With ex usu cf. such phrases as ex re, ex sententia, e re publica, etc.: ex utilitate is not found in the classical period (Drager).
terrae Galliae] lit. ‘the land Gaul’, Galliae being not dependent on, but in apposition to, terrae; so Mons lura, Rhenus flumen, etc.
florentissimis rebus] * though their power was at its height’.
30	locumque...iudicassent]	‘and to select out of so wide an area such a
place for habitation as they should judge to be most suitable and most fertile in (out of) the whole of Gaul’.
p. 17. i Caesaris voluntate] not only did they ask for permission to hold such an assembly, but they wished also to have Caesar’s approval.
concilio]	‘for the assembly’: contrast with the dative here VII. 2
tempore eius rei constituto.
Chap. 31.
eo concilio dimisso] Caesar speaks of the dismissal of the assembly without having previously stated that it was held ; he leaves his readers to gather that from the fact that he had given the required permission (ea re permissa). The curious brevity of this narration has led some to suppose a lacuna after sanxerunt.
16	Arvernos]	the Arvemi occupied the district now called Auvergne.
They claimed to be of kindred descent with the Romans, cf. Luc. I. 427 Arvernique ausi Latio se fingere fratres \ sanguine ab Iliaco populi, potentatu] this word occurs but seldom.
Sequanis]	the Sequani were clientes of the Arvemi. In VI. 12
Caesar attributes to them the leading position here assigned to the Arvemi, ‘ omnes civitates in partes divisae sunt duas cum Caesar in Galliam venit, alterius factionis principes erant Aedui, alterius SequanV; and see below coactos esse (Aeduos) Sequanis obsides dare.
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLLCO.	[Comm. I.
clientes] the Segusiavi, the Aedui Ambarri and the Aulerci Brannovices were clients of the Aedui.
p. 18. 6 qui esset] esset not erat because this is a subordinate clause in or. obi., being a part of Divitiacus’ speech. If erat had been used it would have shown that the clause was to be regarded as containing a parenthetical remark by the writer himself.
Harudum] the Harudes were situated between the Rhine, the Main and the Danube.
locus] ‘room’; sales ‘settlements’, cf. below aliud domicilium alias sedes.
consuetudinem victus] ‘manner of living’: the phrase occurs in Cic. Att. xil. 26. hanc refers to the Gauls, ilia to the Germans.
Admagetobrigae] this name is variously written in the MSS. Nothing whatever is known of the place. (Addenda.)
superbe et crudeliter] ‘with arrogance and cruelty*. Cicero speaking of the last king of Rome says atque ille Tarquinius, quem maiores nostri non tulerunt, non crudelis, non impius sed superbus habitus est et dictus (Phil. ill. 9), yet the two ideas are closely allied, cf. Liv. vni. 33 quantum interesse inter moderationem antiquorum et novam superbiam crudelitatemque.
omnia exempla cruciatusque'] exempla — ‘punishments’ regarded as patterns or warnings to others; cf. Ter. Eun. v. 6. 21 uterque in te exempla edent. Caesar might equally well have written, and possibly did write, omnia exempla cruciatus, cruciatus being gen. sing, after exempla.
non posse] se must be supplied as below with dubitare. Frigell unnecessarily reads sustineri.
nisi si quid'...auxilit] lit. ‘except if there is some aid’=‘unless there is some aid’, for this use of si after nisi cf. Halm on Cic. Phil. 11. § 70 (ed. Mayor).
ut domo emigrent] this clause is explanatory of the preceding faciendum, as in $ facere ut exeant where see note.
25 non dubitare quin] ‘he did not doubt but that he (Ariovistus) would inflict’ etc. se is also omitted with dubitare in 17 neque dubitare quin etc., cf. also non posse above. For the various constructions of dubito see Mr Reid’s note on Cic. de senect. 16.
deterrere posse ne] cf. 17 multitudinem deterrere, ne frumentum conferant: quominus might have been used in place of ne.
Chap. 32.
p. 19. 1 quas ceteri facerent] not quite equivalent to ‘of those things which the rest did ’ for this would require faciebant, but ‘ of such things as the rest did ’.
neque]=neque tamen.
10 horrerent] horrere does not occur elsewhere in Caesar.
reliquis tamen] tamen...vero correspond here nearly to ydv...Ik. ‘The
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGjNOTES.
rest it is true...while the Sequani’. We may perhaps compare Cic. p. Sest. 140 hunc tamen flagrantem...populus Romanus liberavit...ceteri vero which Halm however explains as — hunc quanquam flagrabat... tamen liberavit.
Chap. 33.
secundum ea\ ‘ next to these considerations
fratres co7isanguineosque\ there was some sort of alliance between the Aedui and the Romans as early as 121 B.c.: one of the reasons for the campaign against the Allobroges undertaken in that year was that Aeduorum agros sociorum populi Romani vastavissent Livy Ep. 61 : Tacitus An. xi. 25 says primi Aedui senatorum in urbe ius adepti sunt, datum id foederi antiquo, et quia soli Gallorum fraternitatis nomen cum populo Romano usurpant. Yet the Arverni claimed kinship with the Romans Arvernique ausi Latio se fingere fratres | sanguine ab Iliaco populi Luc. Phars. I. 427. There seems to have been some dim consciousness in the minds of both peoples of the affinities of race and language between the Keltic and Latin stocks. Cf. Cuno I. 49.
saepenumero\ lit. ‘ often in number’: the comparative saepiusnumero occurs in late Latin.
in tanto imperio\ in has not its literal meaning here, but is equivalent to ‘in the case of’. Tr. freely ‘considering the vast empire of the Roman people’.
28 homines feros ac barbaros\ the same expression is used of the Germans in 31.
sibi temperaturos quin\ in 7 sibi is omitted, ncque homines...temperatur os ab iniuria existimabat.
Cimbri Teutonique\ The Teutones were almost exterminated by Gaius Marius in 102 B.C. and the Cimbri in the following year.
Rhodajius divideret] Caesar means ‘especially as only the Rhone separated them from the province ’.
Chap. 34.
p. 20. 4 medium utriusque\ * half way between the two \
si quid] in or. rect. si quid mi hi a te opus esset ego ad te venissem ; si quid tu me vis oportet te ad me venire. This is given as an example of or. obi. by Prof. Kennedy Gram. § 230.
moli??iento\ ‘effort’: cf. appendix.
quid.. .negotii-] for the separation of quid from its dependent genitive cf. vil. 77 quid., animi where nine words intervene.
Chap. 35.
16 consulatu suo] Caesar was consul in 59. His acknowledgment of the authority of Ariovistus is alluded to by Plutarch Caes. 19 and Dion Cass, xxxviii. 34.
Digitized by GOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO.
amplius] ‘that he should not transport any multitude of men any more (or ‘after this’) across the Rhine’; cf. 43 end at ne quos amplius Rhenum transire pateretur.
voluntate eius] ‘ with his full concurrence
si fecisset] ‘if he should do so’, in or. rect. si id feceris\
impetraret] in or. rect. si non impetro ‘if I do not gain my request*.
M. Messala, M. Pisone consulibus] B. C. 61.
quod] = quoad * so far as ’.
se] this word takes up the sese at the beginning of the sentence :
the number of words intervening between it and its verb neglecturum requires its repetition.
Chap. 36.
p. 21. 8 suo] suo refers to Caesar, sibi to Ariovistus: so below in the sentence neminem secum sine sua iniuria contendisse, secum refers to the speaker Ariovistus while sua refers to the imaginary opponent.
iniuria] ‘wrongfully’, an adverbial ablative like iure ‘rightfully*, ratione * rationally ’ etc.
quotannis] literally ‘as many years as there are’, coti (quoti) anni {sunt): the form annis is the old nom. pi. which in the 0-stems ended in is or eis: cf. cotidie ‘as many days as there are’ where the s of the nom. pi. has been lost.
fraternum nomen populi Romani] ‘the title of “brothers” given them by the Roman people’.
longe eis afutururri\ ‘would avail them but little’. Kraner cf. Verg. Aen. xii. 52 longe illi dca mater erit.
16	inter annos XIIII] for this use of inter=intra cf. Cic. Verr. I. 13
inter decem annos (Draeger).
Chap. 37.
eodem tempore...et] ‘at one and the same time these messages were reported to Caesar and deputies came’.
Treveris] the Treveri, a powerful Keltic tribe, were situated on the left bank of the Rhine in the neighbourhood of Treves (formerly Augusta Treverorum) which as well as the district of Trier derives its name from them.
pacem Ariovisti redimere] cf. 44 omnium gratiam atque amicitiam eius morte redimere; B. C. I. 39 largitione militum voluntates redemit.
2 3 pagos centum Sueborum] cf. IV. 1 for some account of this powerful tribe.
Chap. 38.
tridui viam] after the great defeat of the Helvetii near Bibracte Caesar pursued the vast horde of fugitives to the territory of the Lingones in which they had encamped. Caesar gives no indication of the exact locality which they occupied; Napoleon places it at Tonnerre. While here Caesar heard of the arrival of Ariovistus among the Sequani (31) and soon after of the crossing of the Rhine by fresh bodies of Germans (37). He then decided to go and meet Ariovistus, and, as hesays himself, he made forced marches (magnis itineribus ad Ariovistum contendit). In the present chapter he says that after marching for three days he heard that Ariovistus was making for Besan^on and was already three days’ distance from suifines; by this expression Caesar apparently means the third part of the territory of the Sequani that' Ariovistus had annexed. Supposing Caesar to have started from Tonnerre, a forced march of three days may have brought him to the neighbourhood of Arc-en-Barrois, passing through Tanlay, Gland, Laignes, Rtrochey and Dancevoir. The old road between Tanlay and Gland is said to be still called ‘ route de Cesar’.
p. 22. 3 facultas] ‘abundance’, in the next line the word means ‘facilities’. The near repetition of the word in a different sense is perhaps a mark of careless writing, cf. 18; v. 35 ; vil. 20.
Dubis] this is no doubt the correct form of the name; it is the
modem Doubs. (Addenda.)
circino'] circinus [idpiavo* circle) a pair of compasses: see Ovid’s description of the compasses Met. VIII. 247 Primus (Perdix, not Daedalus as Forcellini, ed. De-Vit, says) et ex uno duo ferrea brachia nodo I vinxit ut, aequali spatio distantibus illis, | altefa pars staret pars altera duceret orbem. Ovid’s duceret illustrates circumductum which is neuter agreeing with flumen not with oppidum: tr. ‘ because the river Doubs surrounds almost the whole town as though drawn round it by compasses
7 pedum mille sexcentorum] the exact breadth of the portion of land inclosed between the two arms of the river is said to be 1620 Roman feet, a clear proof that M {mille) must be inserted in defiance of the mss which all agree in DC. The M fell out after the m of pedum. pedum depends loosely on quod est ‘ which consists of amplius not affecting the construction, cf. vn. 15 amplius viginti urbes incenduntur.
Chap. 39.
vocibus] ‘remarks’, ‘expressions’, as below, horum vocibus ac timore.
magnitudine] so Caesar says of the Suebi in IV. 1 quae res (their manner of living) et vires alit et immani corporum magnitudine homines efficit. The Romans were of small stature and were sometimes derided on this account by the stalwart Gauls and Germans, cf. II. 30.
18	aciem oculorum]	Tacitus Germ. 4 speaks of the truces et caerulei oculi
of the Germans. Plutarch Marius xi. says that the Cimbri were considered to be Germans rots fieyideot twv au)fxa.T(>jv kclL ry xaPoir^TVTL T^y ofjLfJLaTW. Cf. Iuv. Xlil. 164.
mmtes animosque] there is no difference here between mens and animus ; the two words coalesce as it were into a single idea: properly speaking mens is the intellectual part of the animus or rational soul of man : anima is the vital principle.
tribunis militum] there were six military tribunes attached to each
p. c. i.	6
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN74	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm. I.
legion; two of these were appointed to command the legion every two months, during which time each exercised sole command on alternate days. They were usually elected partly by the people and partly by the consul. Caesar appears to have chosen his own tribuni, and personal friendship, as we learn from the present passage, influenced his choice. They were all young men of equestrian or senatorial rank.
praefectis] the praefecti were officers exercising the same command over the socii, the allied contingents, as the tribuni did over the legions : every cohors of the socii was commanded by a praefectus and every ala by three praefecti. Mommsen and Marquardt, R. A. V. 377 sqq.
dicerel]	this is an instance of the so-called consecutive use of the
subjunctive; cf. R. § 1680 sqq.
30	testamenta obsignabant™*]	at an earlier period soldiers were allowed
the right of making testaments on the field of battle, which were called testamenta in procinctu. This right subsequently fell into disuse, and Caesar replaced it by the testamentum militare: *militibus liberam testamenti factionem primus quidem divus Iulius Caesar concessit, sed ea concessio, temporalis erat \ etc. Ulpian Digest qu. by Prof. E. C. Clark, Early Roman Law, p. 122 sqq. Wills made under these circumstances were exempt from the customary formalities attending the testa- mentum per aes et libram.
centuriones]	the centurio was the officer in command of a centuria;
there were consequently 60 in a legion. These men having been promoted from the ranks were brave and experienced soldiers.
quique equitatuipraeerant\ the officers commanding the cavalry were called praefecti.
p. 23. 3 timere rem frumentariam ut] a Greek mode of expression for timere utres frumentaria satis commode, etc.; cf. Xen. An. I. 8. 21 Kupos jjdei fiacnXla, oti filoov fyoi too Tlepoucov arparttipLOLros: so in English sometimes, e. g. ‘I know thee who thou art’.
cum...iussisset] ‘ when he should order
non fore dicto audientes] ‘ would not obey *: dicto audiens being equivalent to ‘obedient* is sometimes followed by a dative as in 40; cf. Liv. v. 3 ne plebs nobis dicto audiens neque oboediens sit.
Chap. 40.
8 omnium ordinum centurionibus] ordo—centuria. On this occasion Caesar summoned all the 60 centurions of each legion, whereas it was usual only to summon the primorum ordinum centuriones, that is, in each legion, the 10 centurions in command of the several cohorts, it being usual to advance the highest in rank of the 6 centurions of each cohort to the command of the cohort itself.
ab officio discessurum] ‘ forget his allegiance ’.
15 suam gratiam'] of course in or. rect. this would be meam gratiam, yet notice that below suam virtutem is not equivalent to meam virtutem,
Digitized by GOOglCNOTES.
but means * their own (the soldiers’) valour this is made quite clear by the following ipsius, which refers to Caesar.
18 factum...videbatur] it will be observed that in this sentence the or. obi. almost insensibly passes into direct narration ; this is shown by the indicative videbatur, with which contrast sublevaret in the following sentence, noster in Caesar’s language is simply equivalent to Romanus, and therefore its use here does not of itself indicate that the actual words of the speaker are being quoted.
servili tumultu'] tu?nultus is used generally of an outbreak of hostilities in Italy: cf. Cic. Phil. VIII. 3 itaque maiores nostri tumultum Italicum, quod erat domesticus, tumultum Gallicum quod erat Italiae finitimus, praeterea nullum nominabant. The rising of the slaves under their gallant leader the Thracian Spartacus lasted from 73—71 B. c. Many of these slaves were German or Keltic captives ; hence Caesar’s remark that this tumultus had afforded the Romans an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the Germans and their mode of fighting. Cf. Mommsen Hist. iv. 80 sqq.
quos] the relative refers to servos implied in the adjective servili; tr.
* in the rising of the slaves whom etc.
2\	quantum...boni] quantum is, as usual, separated from its dependent
genitive; cf. 34 quid...negotii.
inermos] the adjectives inermis and inermus are used indiscriminately.
qui] the relative, it need hardly be said, refers to Helvetii, not to the nearer illorum. Caesar’s argument is ‘the Helvetii have often conquered the Germans, we have conquered the Helvetii, much more then shall we conquer the Germans \
si quos] tr. ‘ if any of you are disturbed by the defeat and rout of the Gauls, those persons (/bos) can discover, if they enquire into the matter, that it was when the Gauls were wearied out by a long campaign {diuturnitate belli) that Ariovistus after having for several months fenced himself in amid entrenchments and marshes, without giving them a chance of attacking him, set upon them on a sudden when now despairing of success and dispersed, and overcame them by skilful strategy rather than by open valour ’.
p. 24. 3 cui rationt] ratio is put in the relative clause, when, according to our idiom, at least, it rather belongs to the demonstrative clause hoc {ratione): ‘ even Ariovistus can hardly expect our troops to be taken in by a strategy which served his purpose (lit. ‘for which there was room’) when employed against rude barbarians’.
qui suum timorem] the student should notice the impossibility of literally rendering this very idiomatic sentence into English: tr. freely ‘ those who made their anxiety about the corn supply and the difficulties of the march a pretext for their fear’, or ‘those who construed their fear into an anxiety about etc.
ojficio] ojficium here seems about equivalent to providentia, cum viderentur] ‘inasmuch as they appear*.
6—2
Digitized by (jOOQIC76	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm. I.
9	Leucos]	a Keltic tribe, occupying a part of Lothringen; they had a
town called Tullum (Toul) on the Moselle.
15	felicitatem]	‘good fortune’. Sulla was noted for his felicitas, and
gained thereby the surname of Felix.
17 longiorem] ‘distant’.
repraesentatururn] ‘would do at once’: a metaphorical adaptation of the mercantile use of the word = ‘ to pay on the spot *.
praetoriam cohortem] ‘a body guard’: the term praetoria cohors was applied (i) to a regular body guard of picked men attending on the commander-in-chief, (ii) to the young men of position, who voluntarily attached themselves to the general’s staff in order to see active service. (Kraner.)
Chap. 41.
30 primorum ordinum centurionibus] cf. n. on 40 omnium ordinum centurionibus.
egerunt] jn. egerunt cum tribunis ‘treated with their tribunes’, almost = ‘ besought their tribunes ’.
neque de summa belli] ‘ nor had thought that the supreme decision as to the conduct of the war rested with themselves rather than wdth their commander*. With summa belli, cf. such phrases as summa im- peril, summa rerum, vii. 20, 57, etc.; in v. 11 Caesar writes summa imperii bellique administrandi, cf. B. C. I. 36.
p.25. i ex aliis] this use of alii almost in the sense of ceteri omnes is noticed by Dr'ager Hist. Synt. § 55, who quotes the usage from Terence, Sallust, Livy, Tacitus, but remarks that it is absent from Cicero.
ut...duceret] the clause depends loosely on itinere exquisito ‘having found out the route, viz. that he should lead’.
circuitu] Napoleon is no doubt right in his view that the circuit of 50 or 60 miles means the detour, which it would be necessary to make from the straight line of march in order to avoid the narrow valley of the Doubs. In point of fact the route which would have to be taken to turn the mountain range extending from Besantjon to Monteb&iard is about 50 miles in length.
locis apertis'] abl. of direction used with verbs of motion, R. § 1176: * by open ground*.
6 abesse] abesse may be used with the accusative or ablative of the distance : in the former case the acc. is one of extension, so common in phrases relating to time, as multos menses ‘for many months’. Cf. 22 (end); v. 53, etc., R. § 1086: in the latter case the abl. is one of amount or difference, and may be regarded as of an instrumental character, cf. R. § 1204, who quotes the present passage; cf. also 22 (beg.); 48, etc.
Chap. 42.
quod anted] in or. rect. this would be somewhat as follows : quod (whereas) antea de colloquio postulavisti, id per me facere licet, quoniam
gitized by GoogleNOTES.
propius accessisti, idque me sine periculo facere posse existimo. se is required twice in this sentence, though only actually expressed once: ‘ (he says) that he thinks (se existimare) that he can (se posse) do it \ etc.: the se in the text is probably intended to go with posse, there are many instances of its omission with a principal verb in or. obi. Cf. 17, 31, etc.
ad sanitatem reverti) ‘ return to a sound mind ’, ‘ return to one’s senses’, cf. VII. 42 ut facinore admisso ad sanitatem reverti pudeat; VIII. 22 ad sanitatem perductos. Bell. Alex. 24 cives ad sanitatem revocaret.
pertinacia desisteret) * desist from his obstinacy’: pertinacia is usually perseverance in a bad course, perseverantia perseverance in a good course, Cic. de Inv. Ii. 164; Varro de 1. Lat. V. 2 in quo non debet pertendi et pertendit pertinaciam esse: quod, in quo oporteat manere, si in eo perstet, perseverantia sit: from Cic. Part. Orat. 65 one may gather that the distinction of meaning between these two words was often discussed.
21	causa] 4 hindrance ’.
Gallorum equitatui) Caesar had levied 4000 cavalry in Gaul';
cf. 15-
equis) this word depends on detractis; omnibus agrees with Gallis equitibus.
eo) ‘thereon*, that is, on the horses; cf. 51 ; VII. 58; B. C. ill. 24.
*5 si quid opus facto esset) cf. R. § 1255, where the usage is discussed more fully than in Drager or Madvig. quid is probably an accusative.
non irridicule) ‘ wittily enough ’: the word is said not to occur elsewhere.
pollicitum) the joke lies in the ‘double entendre’: ad equum reseri- bere might mean either 4 to degrade to the rank of cavalry ’, or ‘ to advance to the rank of equites ’, which in earlier times, when the cavalry consisted of equites Kotnani, amounted to the same thing, whereas in Caesar’s army there was no Roman cavalry. As a cohors praetoria (cf. 40 end) they were degraded by being turned into a cavalry regiment, while as legionarii milites, which was their real position, they were honoured by being advanced to the dignity of equites. This, if I understand him aright, is the meaning attached by Kraner to the passage. The soldier’s wit seems scarcely deserving of Caesar’s commendation.
Chap. 43.
30 planities) it is agreed by Napoleon and A. v. Kampen that this is in all probability the open ground near Cemay (Sennheim), a town in Elsass, situated on the Thur, a small affluent of the 111, between the latter river and the Vosges, and at a distance of eight or nine miles from Miihlhausen. In this plain are several rounded hills [tumuli) which would answer the description given by Caesar. Kampen doubtfully selects as the scene of the colloquy an elevation situate midway between the villages of Sulz and Feldkirch, about eight miles N.E. of Cemay. He says that Napoleon gives an incorrect representation of this district in map 6 of his atlas. Caesar’s camp was probably placed
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN78	DE BELLO GALLLCO.	[Comm. I.
between the Thur and the little Doller, a short distance to the west or south-west of Cemay.
quam equis vexerat] ‘which he had put on horseback’, equo vectus (sometimes vehens) = ‘ riding’.
p. 26. 4 postulavit] we may infer from Caesar’s silence that he made no objection to this very reasonable request.
5	rex] cf. 35.
pro magnis hominum officiis] ‘in return for great services on the part of the recipients’.
aditum neque causam postulandi] for aditus with a genitive cf. v. 41 aditum sermonis and B. C. I. 74: ‘right of approach’, hence, as we say, ‘ground to go on’, ‘justification’, ‘excuse*: in B. C. I. 31 we find nanctus aditus ad ea conanda.
beneficio ac liberalitate] so far as these words differ at all here, beneficium is rather the concrete act of kindness, liberalitas the abstract feeling of kindness that prompted the act. In later Latin liberalitas sometimes means 1 a gift ’.
sui nihil deperdere] ‘lose none of their own position’. For non modo...sed cf. n. on 20.
auctiores] the comparative of auctus is rare; it is quoted from Plautus, Lucretius, Horace and Livy. For the sentiment here expressed Kraner qu. Liv. xxxvil. 35 praeter consuetudinem perpetuam populi Romani augendi omni honore regum sociorum maiestatem.
20 in mandatis] ‘among his instructions’, cf. 35. Kraner’s objection to this rendering seems puerile.
Chap. 44.
virtutibus] ‘good deeds’, ‘merits’.
28	ipsis] the Gauls themselves.
p. 27. 2 de stipendio recusare] cf. Cic. Verr. II. 1. 6 desinemus nos de iudiciis transferendis recusare. (Drager.)
9 impugnandae] the word occurs again in ill. 26.
defenderit] defendere bellum ‘to keep off {fend off) war’, ‘act on the defensive’, whereas bellum inferre is to ‘act on the offensive’. Cf. Horace Carm. I. 17 defendit aestatem capellis | usque meis pluviosque ventos. Cf. II. 29.
quam populum Romanum] observe that Caesar might have written quam populus Romanus sc. venisset, but the clause is attracted into the accusative and infinitive by the oblique structure of the rest of the sentence; cf. such irregularities as me non multo minorem quam Laelium in Cic. Ep. Fam. v. 7.
quid sibi vellet cur...veniret] ‘what was his object in coming?’ Kraner divides the sentence into two questions quid sibi vellet ? cur... veniret ?
Digitized by GOOglCNOTES.
provinciam]	‘this Gaul (Gallia independently of the provincia)
belongs to us (suam) just as that Gaul (the province) belongs to you Romans’ [nostram—Romanam),
se] se is here equivalent to nosmet ipsos: ‘so the Romans (we) are acting unfairly in intruding themselves (ourselves).*
hoste] notice the omission of pro before hoste.
quod si eum] ‘if I were to kill you I should do a deed grateful to * etc.
id se] ‘ this I have ascertained from the chiefs themselves by means of their envoys, and I could purchase the gratitude and friendship of all of them at the price of your death’.
p. 28. i sine ullo] ‘without putting you (Caesar) to any difficulty or danger*.
Chap. 45.
in eam sententiam...quare] tr. freely: ‘to show why*.
Arvernos et Rutenos] the Ruteni occupied a district corresponding more or less closely with the department of Aveyron. Their chief town was Segodunum, now Rhodez, on the river Aveyron. The campaign here alluded to occurred in 121 B. C. ; cf. Liv. Epit. 61 Q. Fabius Maximus consul, Pauli nepos, adversus Allobrogas et Bituitum Arvernorum regem felicter pugnavit, ex Bituiti exercitu occisa milia CXX ; ipse cum ad satisfaciendum senatui Romam profectus esset. Album custodiendus datus est, quia contra pacem videbatur ut in Galliam remitteretur, decretum quoque est, ut Congonnetiacus filius eius conprehensus Romam mitteretur. Allobroges in deditionem recepti. After slaughtering 120000 men and carrying away their king and his son the Roman people forgave the survivors and abstained from imposing a tribute on them! This battle appears to have been fought at Vindalium near Avignon. Fabius gained the cognomen Allobrogicus in consequence of this victory. Cf. Mommsen III. Bk. IV. c. 5.
neque in provinciam redegisset] yet a part of the Ruteni dwelt within the limits of the Roman province, for in vii. 7 Caesar speaks of Ruteni provinciales. Cf. in particular Desjardins II. 281. neque redegisset—et quos non redegisset, quos having to be supplied from the previous quibus.
suis legibus uti] this is the usual phrase to express the condition of those communities whose internal administration was independent of Roman control, the liberae et immunes civitates: cf. VII. 76 quibus ille pro meritis civitatem eius immunem esse iusserat, iura legesque reddiderat. The corresponding Greek expression is afrrovofxla. These communities had not complete freedom of legislation ; they could only preserve such laws, customs and institutions as were not opposed to the general lex, or constitution given them by the conquerors at the time of their organization as a conquered district: this was sometimes expressly stated in their constitution: cf. lex de Termes sibus * suis legibus ita utunto...quod adversus hanc legem non fiat\
girval frc
■y of rDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. I.
Chap. 46.
14	propius... coni cere] it should be noticed that the sentence consists
of two clauses with no connecting copula (i) propius ...adequitare, (ii) lapidis...conicere; of these the first is subdivided into two parts accedere et adequitare. *
facit...recepit] the change of tense is noticeable; it is not infrequent in animated narration.
per fidem\ per is here used to express the ground or occasion of deception. Caesar had given them a pledge and he did not wish them to be taken in through their confidence therein. The meaning of fides fluctuates between ‘ an assurance given ’ and ‘ an assurance felt hence it is sometimes ‘pledge’, ‘word of honour’, sometimes ‘faith’, ‘trust’ etc. I see no reason to suspect the genuineness of the text.
elatum est] * it got abroad ’.
interdixisset] interdicere usually, as here, takes a dative of the person forbidden and an ablative of the forbidden place {omni Gallia) or action.
ut] ‘how’.
Chap. 47.
27	coeptae]	for this passive use of coepi cf. II. 6; IV. 18 (twice).
Drag. H. S. I § 92, Madvig Kleine Philologische Schriften 363. neque]=neque tamen.
29 minus vellet] a little less precise than nollet, legatis] see appendix.
p. 29. 2 Procillum] cf. 19.
qua multa] these words refer to linguae: ‘which Ariovistus employed to a great extent’.
in eo] ‘in his case’: tr. ‘because in his case the Germans had no motive for wrong-doing’.
11 conclamavit] ‘cried aloud’, more emphatic than clamavit: con in composition sometimes merely adds a notion of completeness to the simple verb.
Chap. 48.
14	consedit]	possibly near the village of Hartmannsweiler, about a mile
south of Sulz: this would be on the lower slopes of the Vosges (sub monte).
16	castra fecit]	the position now taken by Ariovistus was, according
to Kampen, just above the small town of Schweighausen, on the north bank of the little Doller about two miles south of Cernay (Sennheim): Napoleon makes him encamp a little more to the eastward. Kampen objects to the circuitous route which Napoleon represents Ariovistus to have taken from his position near Sulz to that now described. He considers it more probable that the Germans marched in a tolerably
Digitized by GoogleCapp. 46—50]	NOTES81
straight line, along a road of which there appear to be some traces still left.
18	supportaretur]	the subjunctive is used because this is a subordinate
relative clause, supportabatur would have been equally correct, but then the clause qui...supportabatur would have been an independent remark of the writer, not influenced by the rest of the sentence. It should be noticed how often the preposition sub adds the notion of ‘assistance’ to the simple verb, e.g. subvenire ‘to come to one’s assistance’, supportare ‘to carry to one’s assistance’, succurrere, suppetere, submittere, subministrare etc.: cf. subsidium,
genus hoc erat pugnae] a similar practice obtained among the Gauls: cf. vii. 18.
cum his versabantur] ‘with these they were associated*.
si quid erat durius] cf. V. 29 si nihil esset durius, tr. ‘in case of any difficulty’.
29 si quo] quo is the adverb of direction.
Chap. 49.
p. 30. 2 idoneum locum] this locality is probably to be sought between the little Doller and the great Doller, on some rising ground about half way between the villages of Nieder Aspach and Michelbach, about two miles south of Caesar’s original camp (cf. 43) called castra maiora to distinguish it from this the castra minora. acie triplici instructa] cf. n. on 24.
primam et secundam,,.iussit] a similar distribution of forces is mentioned in B. C. I. 41 prima et secunda acies in armis permanebat, post hos opus in occulto a tertia acie jiebat.
passus sexcentos] this is an accusative of extent with abesse (cf. n. on 41) and is not governed by circiter which is used independently as in the similar expression above circiter passus DC ab eis locum delegit, and in the next sentence circiter hominum numero XVI milia where milia is nominative. In the next chapter circiter governs the accusative meridiem,
8 secius] for the derivation of this word cf. n. on iv. 17.
Chap. 50.
18 ad vesperum] vesperum is more common than vesperam in such phrases as this, though vespera is more frequent than vesper.
23	matresfamiliae] cf. Tac. Hist. IV. 61 vetere apud Germanos more quo
plerasque feminarum fatidicas et augescente superstitione arbitrantur deas; Germ. 10 vidimus sub divo Vespasiano Veledam diu apudplerosque numinis loco habitam, sed et olim Albrunam et complures alias venerati sunt non adulatione nec tanquam facerent deas. Schweizer-Sidler qu. Thierry ‘dans un etat exalte de rame il arrivait souvent aux femmes Germaines de prendre la parole en vers improvises ou dans un langage plus poetique et plus module que le simple discours. On en trouve une
Original from JNIVERSITY OF MICDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. I.
foule d’exemples dans les sagas, qui sont le monument le plus complet des anciennes moeurs Germaines*.
sortibus] for their method of proceeding cf. Tac. Germ, io: the marks cut upon the twigs were no doubt runes, as Kraner suggests.
ex usu] ‘advantageous*: cf. R. § 1941 where a number of similar phrases are collected.
Chap. 51.
alarios] ‘auxiliaries*: the socii were usually distributed on the wings of two combined legions, and so consisted of an ala dextra and an ala sinistra: the men composing an ala are called alarii. Caesar put forward his auxiliaries en masse to mask his weakness in regular troops.
generating ‘according to their tribes*: so in VII. 19 the Gauls were generatim distributi in civitates.
p. 31. 1 Harudes] cf. n. on 31.
Marcomanos] the name Marcomani does not appear to denote a distinct people: the word is said to mean ‘border-warriors’. ‘When Caesar mentions Marcomanni among the peoples fighting in the army of Ariovistus, he may in this instance have misunderstood a merely appellative designation, just as he has decidedly done in the case of the Suebi*. Mommsen IV. 232 n.
Triboces] the Triboces, ‘hillmen’, appear to have dwelt between the Vosges and the Rhine. Breucomagus (Brumat) was one of their strongholds.
Vangiones] this tribe dwelt in the neighbourhood of Worms, the old name of which was Vangiones, and still earlier, Borbetomagus.
2	Nemetes]	this people is said to have inhabited the left bank of the
Rhine about Spires.
Sedusios] little or nothing is known as to the locality of this tribe.
Suebos] cf. iv. 1, and Mommsen quoted above.
redis et carris] reda is a fourwheeled, carrus a twowheeled, vehicle. Both words are Keltic.
eo] ‘thereon’, cf. 42.
passis manibus] ‘ with outstretched hands’; some late editions have crinibus. Cf. II. 13, VII. 48.
Chap. 62.
singulis] Caesar means that, of his six legions, one was commanded by a quaestor and each of the remaining five by a legatus. It was only under the Empire that the legion was regularly commanded by a legatus. The quaestor was properly a financial functionary; Caesar had only one at a time with him in Gaul: cf. v. 25: supra 21.
8 earn partem] i.e. the part of the enemies’ lines opposite his own right wing, in other words, their left wing.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANita] ita is not used to connect this sentence with the preceding (‘ and so *), but is to be taken closely with acriter and is the antecedent to ut: ‘ our men charged so vigorously... that * etc.
procurrerunt] the form procurri is more frequent than procucurri.
reperti sunt] this incident reminds one somewhat of the patriotism of the Swiss hero Arnold von Winckelried.
desuper vulnerarent] I imagine the meaning to be that the Roman literally leapt upon his antagonist, tore aside his shield with one hand, and with the other inflicted a downward blow with his short sword {gladius). See appendix.
20 P. Crassus] son of M. Licinius Crassus the triumvir.
Chap. 53
quinque] this is the reading of the mss. Napoleon (followed by
Kampen) relying on the testimony of Orosius and Plutarch reads quin- quaginta, supposing that the Germans did not take the direct route to the Rhine which is nearly 20 miles from Cemay but followed the valley of the 111, in which direction they had come, and crossed the Rhine somewhere near Rhinau. Goler on the contrary retains quinque, and imagines Caesar to mean the 111 which is a tributary of the Rhine.
28 Ariovistus] we learn from v. 29 that Ariovistus died soon after this.
duae uxores] polygamy was rare among the Germans. Tac. Germ.
18 says prope soli barbarorum singulis uxoribus contenti sunt, exceptis admodum paucis qui non libidine sed ob nobilitatem plurimis nuptiis ambiuntur.
duae filiae] the plural is subdivided by altera...altera, and the verb capta est is constructed with the second altera; thus duae filiae is almost a nominativus pendens. Caesar might equally well have written ex duabus harum filiis altera occisa altera capta est. See appendix.
p. 32. a trinis] ‘triple*.
neque...quicquam] = et quod nihil,	‘and because fortune had not di
minished aught of the great pleasure and congratulation consequent on the victory by any injury to him
Chap. 54.
14 quos Ubii] on the text of this passage cf. appendix.
maturius] Napoleon’s calculations make it probable that the defeat of Ariovistus took place in September.
citeriorem Galliam] Gallia cisalpina.
ad conventus agendos] this is usually Caesar’s professed object in visiting Italy during the intervals of his Gallic campaigns; his real object was of course to watch political events at Rome. Cf. my n. on v. 1 and vii. 1. Plutarch Caesar 20 says ‘having effected these things he left his forces to winter among the Sequani, while he himself,84	DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. I.
anxious to observe events at Rome, went down (xarfj3ij i.e. from the Alps) into Gaul around the Padus, which formed a part of the consular province given him. For the river Rubicon separates the rest of Italy from the Keltic land beneath the Alps. There he stationed himself and courted popular favour (id-rjixcLyibyei), while many persons visited him, whose several requests he granted, and sent them all away either already possessed of his benefits or hoping to receive them. And throughout the whole course of his campaign, unsuspected by Pompey, he was ever at one time overthrowing the enemy by the arms of the citizens, at another, taking and subduing the citizens by money drawn from the enemy
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANBOOK II.
Chap. 1.
p. 33. 3 certior fiebat] *he was from time to time informed’; the imperfect of repeated action like afferebantur.
dixeramus] the perfect tense is more usual in expressions of this
kind, as above, demonstravimus; cf. however 24, 28, iv. 27. For the statement in question cf. I. 1, with notes.
omni Gallia] all Keltic Gaul: the abl. abs. is equivalent to si omnis Gallia pacaretur.
ferebant'] one would have expected ferrent and below studerent and posscnti the verbs of subordinate relative clauses in or. obi. being usually in the subjunctive, but Caesar is here gradually and as it were insensibly passing from or. obi. to or. rect., for it will be noticed that above quod (because) is followed first by the subjunctive sollicitarentur but afterwards by the indicative occupabantur.
mobilitate et levitate animi] Caesar frequently alludes to the fickle character of the Gauls: with this passage cf. iv. 5.
conducendos] conducere is here ‘to hire*, in the next chapter it is used in its ordinary sense of ‘gather together’: the present passage shows how easily the one meaning passes into the other.
earn rem] i.e. kingly power.
imperio nostro] ‘if our rule were established’: ablative of attendant circumstances, cf. I. 18 itnperio populi Romani.
Chap. 2.
duas legiones] these legions were the xmth and xivth.
inita aestate] Kraner remarks that Caesar never has ineunte aestate.
qui deduceret] for the position of the relative which here precedes its logical antecedent Q. Pedium legatum cf. I. 21 qualis esset natura montis...qui cognoscerent, misit.
Q. Pedium] Suetonius (Caes. 83) says that Q. Pedius was a grandson of Caesar’s sister. Napoleon says that he was her son and yet refers to Suetonius as his authority. Mr Long thinks, on chronological grounds, that Suetonius is wrong and that Pedius was Julia’s son. He was consul B.c. 43 and died during his tenure of office.86	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. II.
ad exercitum venit] probably at Vesontio (Besan$on) the chief town of the Sequani.
Senonibus] the Senones occupied a large district around Agedincum (Sens) which was their chief stronghold.
dubitandum non existimavit quin] for quin with dubito (‘hesitate’) in a negative sentence cf. B.c. ill. 37 sibi dubitandum no?i putavit quin; cf. B.C. in. 23 non cunctandum existimavit quin. See Mr Reid’s n. on Cic. de Senect. 16. Schneider qu. by Long says, non dubitare with infinitive expresses the absence of hesitation in act, non dubitare with quin and subjunctive expresses the absence of hesitation in forming a decision.
diebus circiter quindecim] Caesar would probably travel, says Napoleon, through Langres, Bar-sur-Aube and Vitry-le-Fran9ois in the neighbourhood of which he would arrive at the Belgic frontier; the distance from Besanjon to Vitry is about 145 miles.
Chap. 3.
p. 34.	1	de	improviso]	cf. de subito (sometimes written as one word), de
integro, de novo (denuo) etc.: the preposition ex is often used in the same way, ex inopinato, ex integro, ex facili etc., so in Greek ££ &Trpoo5oKT)Tov.
celerius omni opinione] ‘ quicker than any could expect
Remi] the district occupied by this people corresponds roughly speaking to the departments of Marne and Ardennes. Their chief town Durocortorum afterwards called Remi is the modern Rheims.
4 primos civitatis] the same expression occurs again in 13.
imperata facere] the usual terms for submission to a superior power.
10 cts Rhenum] ‘on this (i.e. the Gallic) side of the Rhine’.
Suessiones] this people gave its name to Soissons originally Noviodunum. Strabo says that they ranked among the Belgians next to the Bellovaci in bravery.
potuerint] the subjectis, of course, Remi: they could not deter the Suessiones from joining the Belgic confederacy.
Chap. 4.
possent] posse is sometimes used in the sense of ‘to be powerful’, cf. I. 18, and this is the usual meaning of the present participle potens ‘powerful’: in the present passage quid possent^ in what degree they were powerful’, 4 what power they had’, cf. 8.
Belgas] for the origin of the Belgae cf. I. 1. •
ibt] ‘ in their present position’.
Teutonos Cimbrosque] for these events cf. Momms. III. 189, 190.
24	sumerent] this represents a present subjunctive in the actual words
of the report given to Caesar ‘ qua ex re fit ut sumant’ which in or. obi. becomes qua ex re fieri {dicebant) ut sumerent.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANNOTES.
propinquitatibus affinitatibusque\ ‘ties of kinship and affinity’:	-
pinqui are blood relations [cognati), affines relations by marriage, the cognati of husband and wife. Cf. Mr Long’s note.
28	plurimum Bellovacos valere]	this agrees with the testimony of Strabo.
They were situated between the coast and the Oise : their name survives in Beauvais : Bratuspantium (Breteuil) was one of their towns.
32 suos finitimos] neighbours of themselves, the Remi, into whose mouth this report is put. Had Caesar meant that the Suessiones were neighbours of the Bellovaci he would have written eorum or eis for suos.
p. 35. i Divitiacum] it is scarcely necessary to say that this is a different person from the Aeduan Divitiacus mentioned in the next chapter.
Britanniae]	this is not to be understood of the whole of Britain ; the
authority of Divitiacus was probably confined to what Caesar calls the maritima pars of the island : cf. IV. 12.
Nervios] cf. 15.
Atrebates] the town of Arras, formerly called Nemetocenna, in Artois owes its name to this people.
Ambianos] the Ambiani occupied both banks of the Somme and gave their name to Amiens which was originally called Samarobriva.
Morinos] the Morini (extremique hominum Morini Verg. Aen. vm. 727) occupied the coast from Boulogne to Antwerp.
Menapios] this tribe inhabited the district lying between the Scheldt and the Rhine; we learn from iv. 4 that there were some of them dwelling on the right bank of the latter river.
Caletos] the Caleti occupied the department of Seine inferieure. St Vallery en Caux appears to preserve a trace of their name.
Veliocasses] they also dwelt on the north bank of the Seine; their chief town was Rotomagus (Rouen); their name may survive in the district of Vexin.
Viromanduos] the Viromandui (cf. Vermandais a district of St Quentin) dwelt east of the Atrebates, south of the Nervii.
Aduatucos]	this tribe is to be sought east of the Nervii between
Brussels and Spa. In 29 Caesar gives an account of their origin.
Condrusos] the Condrusi occupied the right bank of the Meuse and both banks of the Ourthe, and were situated south of Aix la Chapelle.
Eburones] the Eburones dwelt between the Meuse and the Rhine, north of Aix la Chapelle: they were clients of the Treveri: cf. iv. 6.
Caeroesos] this tribe, which is not elsewhere mentioned in Caesar, seems to have been situated on the right bank of the Ourthe below the Condrusi.
Paemanos] the Paemani occupied a district south of the Aduatuci between the Meuse and the Ourthe.
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. II.
qui...appellantur] this is a remark of the writer’s, and is not a part of the report df the Remi, hence the indicative. arbitrari] se must be supplied.
Chap. 5.
liberaliter oratione prosecutus] ‘having treated them to a gracious speech’. Caesar’s ‘graciousness’ is immediately followed by a demand for hostages, as in IV. 18 liberaliter respondit obsidesque ad se adduci iubet. prosequi aliquem aliqua re lit. ‘to accompany* or ‘escort a person with something’, hence ‘to honour’, cf. Nagelsbach Lat. Stil. § 108.
senatum] Caesar borrows a title of the Roman constitution to describe the Gallic parliament; cf. 28 senatores.
magno opere...quanto opere] the repetition is unpleasant and is a mark of hasty writing.
Axonam] the Aisne: this river did not actually form the limit between the Remi and the Suessiones, but was sufficiently near the border to justify Caesar in saying that it was in extremis Remorum finibus.
castra] recent excavations have shown clear traces of this camp; it was situated on a slight eminence between the Aisne and the Miette about a mile to the north-east of Berry-au-Bac. ‘This hill, called Mauchamp, is of small elevation (about 25 metres) above the valley of the Aisne, and in its length from east to west it presents sufficient space for the Roman army to deploy. Laterally, it sinks to the level of the surrounding ground by slight undulations, and the side which looks upon the Miette descends by a gentle slope towards the banks of the stream’. (Napoleon.)
essent] Caesar might have written erant ‘ those places which were (as a fact) behind him’; quae essent rather means ‘such places as were’.
praesidium] the intrenchments of this tete-du-pont are said to be still clearly visible at Berry-au-Bac.
in altera parte] on the south bank, Caesar being on the north bank. A castellum seems to have been constructed for Sabinus and his cohorts, cf. 9 castellum cui praeerat Q. Titurius. A. v. Kampen naturally expresses his surprise at Napoleon’s having omitted to mark this castellum on his map.
p. 36. 2 duodeviginti pedum] 18 feet broad. The excavations made on the site of the camp have proved the correctness of Caesar’s description; the depth of the fosse appears to have been about 10 feet. The * chiasmus ’ or inverted order should be noticed in this sentence (pedum XII vallofossaque X VIIIpedum), cf. 12 propter latitudinem fossae murique altitudinem; vii. 77 fama nobiles potentesque bello. Kenn. L. Gram. Appendix F.
munire iubet] the object of iubet is omitted here as often, cf. v- 33-NOTES.
Chap. 6.
Bibrax] as Caesar’s camp is admitted to have been situated near the village of Berry-au-Bac, the site of Bibrax must be sought at a distance of 8 Roman miles therefrom. Goler places it at Beaurieux, a small village about a mile from the north bank of the Aisne, and at about the requisite distance from Berry-au-Bac; others, Napoleon, Kampen, etc., prefer Vieux Laon, a small waste plateau, about 12 miles east of Laon. The latter view finds the most adherents.
ex itinere] ‘ on their way ’.
moenibus ] moenia are ‘ the fortifications ’ generally and are therefore virtually equivalent to the murus mentioned immediately after: totis moenibus is an ablative of place ‘the whole length of the fortifications ’.
coepti sunt] cf. I. 47.
testudine facta] the men of the advancing column held their shields with a forward slope over their heads in such a way as to present to the besieged a continuous and impenetrable roof which from a fancied resemblance in use or appearance to a tortoise-shell received the name of testudo. The manoeuvre is fully described by Livy xxxiv. 39.
portas succendunt] I doubtfully follow Vielhaber in retaining the succendunt of the MSS. He quotes VII. n Caesar legiones.'..portis succensis intromittit; the reading also derives some slight confirmation from the statement in 7 omnibus vicis aedificiisque quos adire poterant incensis; if they set fire to so many other places it is only natural to suppose that they tried to do so to Bibrax; that they did not succeed in burning down the gates may be gathered from the fact that no mention is made of the besiegers actually forcing an entrance. The present tenses succendunt, subruunt may very well mean ‘ attempt * or * begin to fire the gates and undermine the wall ’. Kraner and Long read succedunt, and the former omits portas and aptly quotes Sail. lug. 57 alii succedere et murum suffodere.
nullt] the word is made emphatic by its position at the end of the sentence.
14 tum praefuerat] the pluperfect praefuerat with tum=qui praepositus erat et tum praeerat (Kraner).
Chap. 7.
eo] to Bibrax.
Numidas] Numidae is a corruption of the Greek word 'KofiaSes ‘nomads ‘ wanderers ’, a title applied to certain roving tribes in North Africa. Plin. V. 3 Numidia est Masinissae clara nomine Metagonitis terra a Graecis appellata, Numidae vero Nomades a permutandis pabulis, mapalia sua, hoc est domos, plaustris circumferentes; cf. Horace’s campestres melius Scythae \ quorum plaustra vagas rite trahunt domos | vivunt (Carm. III. 24. 9). They were a very hardy people, cf. Appian (aaai 8e Kai \ifxbv (plpetu ol No/ux5e$ oi'de ical irhq. XP1(T^CL,‘ iroXXam clvtI cltoV Kal rb Trd/JLTrav udpowoToZoiv, 0 re tirwos ai/rdis Kpidrjs p.kv ovb' oXws
p. c. i.	7
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. II.
yeferat, irorjffxiywv det, nivei db Sid iroXXou. The same author says that the Numidians were /xaicpopiurraToi: the extraordinary vigour of their famous king Masinissa is attested by Polybius xxxvn. 10. The Numidians in Caesar’s army were light-armed foot-soldiers, not cavalry, cf. io, 24. Numidia was constituted a Roman province after the battle of Thapsus in 46.
Cretas] the Cretans were famous for their archery, and, it may be added, for their knavery, cf. Ep. Tit. i. 12 Kprjres del xl/evcrrat, #ca\d Oijpla, yaarlpes apyal (quoted from the Kretan Epimenides), Plutarch Aemil. 23 npbs Kprjra KpTjrlfav ‘to outwit a knave\ Pompey had a detachment of Cretan archers in his army during the civil war; B. C. III. 4. Crete was conquered by L. Caecilius Metellus (thence called Creticus) and made a Roman province in 67.
Baleares]	the Baliaric islands, Majorca and Minorca, were con
quered in 123 by Q. Caecilius Metellus, who thence gained the cognomen of Balearicus.
potiundi oppidi]	this expression taken in connexion with in. 6 potiun-
dorum castrorum implies, as Kraner points out, that potiri is here to be considered as governing an accusative; in III. 24 it is used with an ablative victoria, and possibly in I. 3, where see note.
ab] ‘at a distance of*. Cf. 30 ab tanto spatio ‘so far off*. The Belgae were encamped in a long line between Vieux Laon and Berry-au-
Cf. 24 quorum virtutis opinio est singularis.
proelio supersedere] proelio is probably the ablative, though the dative is sometimes found with supersedeo, as in Bell. Afric. 75 supersedeo pugnae: cf. R. § 1212.
quid...posset"] ‘what the enemy could do in the way of valour’; for
this use of posse cf. 4 and below quod tantum multitudine poterant.
32 loco opportuno']=cum locus esset opportunus.
p. 37. 2 adversus] ‘ in face \ Caesar appears to be regarding his position from his enemies’ point of view who could see a long stretch of hill side over against them (adversus), and so uses the word adversus in describing it, heedless of the difficulty thereby caused to readers who have not the ground before them.
lateris delectus'] ‘a falling away of the side ’ expresses a steeper slope than the following leniter fastigatus.
in fronte] Caesar seems to mean the north-east front or face of the hill which is a long ridge between two and three miles in length running south-west and north-east; it was on this, the higher end, that Caesar’s camp was placed.
ab utroque latere] Caesar does not express himself very clearly, but his language does not appear to be irreconcileable with the existing traces
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANof the fortifications as shown in Napoleon’s atlas. The ditches in question started from opposite corners of the encampment; one was a continuation down the north slope of the hill of the ditch flanking the agger on the south-west side of the camp, the other a continuation down the south slope of the hill of the similar ditch flanking the earthwork of the opposite north-east face of the camp. This lower fosse crossed the present bed of the Aisne which used to flow in a tolerably straight line parallel to, and at a regular distance of about one kilometre from, the hill on which Caesar was encamped, but now bends inward in a half circle just at the foot of that part of the hill on which the Roman camp stood; thus the redoubt at the end of the ditch stood about half-way between the old and new river beds. The object of these fosses was to prevent the enemy from turning the right of the Roman position and getting round between them and the Aisne.
transversam] * at right anglesi. e. to the line of the hill. obduxit] obducere is * to draw in front *, * draw forward as a
protection or barrier; hence the word often means * to cover * or * conceal ’.
castella] each fosse had a castellum or redoubt at the end of it.
tormenta] tormentum is any kind of engine or appliance for throwing missiles.
si quo] ‘ whithersoever ’: quo is an adverb of direction.
pro castris] on the north-west front of the hill, between it and the little river Miette. The Belgic forces were drawn up on the opposite side of the Miette.
Chap. 9.
palus] the marshy ground through which flows the above-mentioned stream la Miette.
si...exspectabant] * were waiting to see if our men would cross ’.
inter duas odes'] inter appears to be used in its strictly local sense; if so, Kampen is wrong in marking the locality of the equestrian engagements higher up the stream.
secundiore] * the cavalry skirmish having resulted favourably for the Romans \
pontem] the bridge at Berry-au-Bac where Titurius Sabinus was stationed with six cohorts; cf. 5.
si minus potuissent] ‘ if they should prove unable ’, above si possent * if they were able ’.
Chap. 10.
30 pontem traducit] Caesar’s camp, it will be remembered, was on the north bank of the Aisne, about a mile to the eastward of the bridge at Berry-au-Bac, while the enemy were trying to cross from the north to the south bank, a mile or two to the westward of the bridge : Caesar accordingly sends his cavalry over the bridge to the south bank to oppose the enemy on crossing.
7—2
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANq2	DE BELLO GALLICO.	£Comm. II.
p. 38. 4 neque nostros.. .progredi]=et nostros non progredi.
coepit] four consecutive words here begin with c and three of them with con. I have noticed a similar instance of Ka.Ko<t>u>vla in vn. 29.
constituerunt optimum esse...et convenirent] observe the change of construction after constituerunt from acc. and inf. optimum esse to the subjunctive convenirent with ut omitted : ‘they determined that it was best...and that they should assemble \ Pluygers suggests convenire.
finibus Bellovacorum\ probably they had got as far as the Marne which they would have to cross before reaching the land of the Bellovaci.
15	neque.. .ferrent] = et ut suis auxilium non ferrent.
Chap. 11.
cum...peteret] ‘ each one seeking for himself’ etc.
consimilis fugae'] fugae may be genitive, see my n. on v. 53 end ; yet in v. 12, vi. 27 consimilis is evidently followed by a dative, as Kraner points out.
Caesar] the position of the nom. Caesar in the middle of the abl. abs. should be noticed, cf. v. 49; vii. 1, 6.
speculatores] these appear to have been irregular scouts, while the exploratores mentioned afterwards formed in all likelihood regularly organised and mounted detachments. (From Kraner’s Einleitung.)
discederent] this must not be translated as if it were discessissent.
ab extremo agmine] ‘in the extreme rear’; for this use of ab cf. ab novissimis, a tergo ‘ in the rear ’, etc.
consisterent] the subject of consisterent\ viz. ei, must be supplied from the relative quos.
p. 39. i tantam spatium] tantus... quantus are used because Caesar implies that the number of men slain was proportioned to the space of time during which the slaughter could go on ; they slew as long as there was light; lit. * they slew so great a multitude as there was space of day ’.
Chap. 12.
priusquam... reciperent] ‘ before they should recover ’: the sub
junctive serves to denote the intention of the subject of the principal sentence : 4 before they did recover ’ would require recipiebant. Cf. n. on iv. 4.
magno itinere confecto] the expression is a strange one, considering the context: Kraner brackets confecto. Perhaps, as Vielhaber suggests, this word is to be explained by the consideration that ‘we occasionally find ablativi consequentiae formed with the participle perfect to express a circumstance which does not precede but accompanies or follows the main action’ Madvig L. G. § 431 obs. 2: in the present passage the forced march is not prior to his hastening to Noviodunum but synchronous with it, ‘ Caesar hastened to Noviodunum making a forcedNOTES.
march \ It is suggested by Schneider that Caesar only reached the boundaries of the Suessiones on the first day, and then on the following day hastened (contendit) to Noviodunum, and that the magnum iter refers to the first stage of the journey from Berry to the border line of the Suessiones; but, as Mr Long points out, this interpretation seems scarcely to accord with the words of the text.
Noviodunum] two other places of this name are mentioned in the B. G., cf. VII. 12, 55. It is generally supposed that our Noviodunum occupied the site of the town of Soissons though Desjardins hesitates to affirm this : M. Peigne-Delacourt places it at Noyon where there are clear traces of a Gaulish oppidum, but the distance of this place from Berry-au-Bac, between 40 and 50 Roman miles, adds greatly to the difficulties of the narrative; besides, as Desjardins says, Caesar would in that case have mentioned the passage of the Oise. The Suessiones had 12 oppida and it is probable that more than one of these may have been named Noviodunum which appears to be equivalent to the name now so common in this part of France ‘ Neuf-chateau cf. such widespread names as Neapolis, Newtown, Newton, Neuville, Neustadt, etc.
ex itinere] ex seems to denote here the immediate sequence of the events; no sooner was the march ended than the siege began.
vacuum ab defensoribus] this usage is also found in Cicero and Tacitus, cf. B. G. ill. 1, B. C. III. 3 spatium vacuum a bello.
audiebat] * he was told probably on several occasions, hence the imperfect.
latitudinem fossae murique altitudinem] for this inversion of words, called by the grammarians chiasmus from an imaginary resemblance to the introversion of the two lines of the Greek letter X, cf. supra 5 (end).
paucis defendentibus] ‘though it had only a few defenders’, a concessive abl. abs.
castris munitis] * having made an entrenched camp \
vineas agere] ‘to move up penthouses’; agere =‘to advance’, ‘push forward ’. For the construction of the vineae cf. my n. on vn. 17.
comparare coepit] Soissons is about 28 miles from Berry-au-Bac. It would appear from Caesars language that he marched from Berry to Noviodunum in one day and on his arrival found time to begin the construction of his military engines,
ex fuga] the use of ex is similar to that noticed above in the phrase ex itinere; they stayed their flight and collected at Noviodunum. Goler is no doubt right in saying that the fugitive Suessiones crossed the river and entered the town on the north side which Caesar had not invested.
aggere iacto] ‘an earthwork having been constructed’ : compare a similar use of iacere in the common phrase iacere fundamenta * to lay a foundation \
Digitized by Google94	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. II.
conservarentur] conserventur would be more regular, but the other verbs in the sentence being historic, presents are virtually equivalent to past tenses.
impetrant] * they gain their request ’.
Chap. 13.
primis civitatis] ‘ the chief men of the state ’; so in 3.
Bratuspantium] it is now generally agreed that Bratuspantium was
near the modern Breteuil in the department of Oise, perhaps at Mont- didier.
accessisset...poneret] observe the change of tense, ‘when he had approached the town and was pitching his camp*.
passis manibus] cf. I. 51 where some late editions have crinibus, VII. 47, and 48 where Caesar says matres familiae suos obtestari et more Gallico passum capillum ostentare coeperunt and Verg. Aen. I. 480; there is no doubt however about the correctness of manibus; cf. B. C. ill. 98 passis palmis, so Lucr. v. 1200, Verg. Aen. III. 263.
Chap. 14.
32 fecit verba] ‘spoke’: distinguish between verbum facere ‘to utter a word’ (generally in a negative or quasi-negative sentence) and verba facere ‘to talk’ or ‘speak’: the difference is clearly marked in Cic. Verr. iv. 147 antequam verbum facerem ‘before I should utter a word’ and a lew lines further on quod ego in senatu Graeco verba jecissem. Cic. p. Rose. Am. 2 and 28; Terence Andria 177.
p. 40. 5 Briianniani] even thus early political refugees found a shelter in Britain.
sua] ‘ his well-known clemency and compassion’: the same expression occurs again in 31.
quod si fecerit] in or. rect. si haec facies, amplificabis.
si qud\ ‘to support (the burdens of) whatever wars may have occurred ’.
consuerint] the infinitive consuesse would have done equally well, only in that case the clause would have been rather less closely connected with the previous clause than it now is, cf. my n. on IV. 7. Cicero’s treatment of these subordinate relative clauses exhibits a similar irregularity, cf. Mr Reid’s n. on Cic. Lael. 45.
Chap. 15.
honoris Divitiaci causa] ‘out of respect for Divitiacus’. For the common use of honoris causa in mentioning a living person by name cf. Halm on Cic. Phil. 11. 30 (ed. Mayor).
in fide?n recepturum] ‘receive under his protection*; this is only a polite w ay of saying that he would receive their submission.
Digitized by GOOglCnotes.:
Ambianorum]	cf. n. on 4. There can be little doubt but that
Caesar passed through Samarobriva (Amiens) the chief stronghold of the Ambiani. Goler places Samarobriva at Bray. The name means “Bridge of the Samara” (Somme).
NervU] the Nervii occupied the districts of Bavay, Hainault and Brabant. They were of Germanic origin; cf. Tac. Germ. 28 Treveri et Nervii circa affectationem Germanicae originis ultro ambitiosi sunt, tan- quam per hanc gloriam sanguinis a similitudine et inertia Gallorum separentur. Bagacum, now Bavay, was their chief oppidum.
nihil pati vini] with this compare Caesar’s account of the Germans iv. 2 vinum ad se omnino importari non sinunt, quod ea re ad laborem ferendum remollescere homines atque effeminari arbitrantur. On the text of this passage see appendix.
qui se dedidissent] * for having surrendered themselves’; qui is causal. proiecissent ‘flung away’.
confirmare] with this verb se must be supplied; the following sese belongs to missuros.
Chap. 16.
26	triduum]	acc. of duration of time; ‘ when he had marched for three
days’. Caesar might equally well have written tridui depending on iter *a march oF three days’ duration’. Caesar’s route probably lay through Camaracum (Cambrai) and Bagacum (Bavay).
7 Sabim] the Sambre: the m appears in the name as early as the 4th cent, in the adjective Sambricus.
traits id flumen\ it is generally supposed that the Nervii were encamped on the rising ground at the back of the village of Hautmont about two miles south-west of Maubeuge. The river lay between the Romans and the Nervii.
33 in cum locum] perhaps near Thuin, where there is still much marshland, a few miles north-east of Hautmont on the right bank of the Sambre. Napoleon says at Mons at the confluence of the Haine and the Trouille about ten miles north of Hautmont.
Chap. 17.
p.41. 6 eorum consuetudine] notice the strange accumulation of genitives; eorum dierum and itineris both depend on consuetudine while exercitus nostri is the genitive after itineris; cf. III. 18 superiorum dierum Sabini cunctatio, 1. 19 sine eius offensione animi.
impedimentorum] ‘beasts of burden’.
sarcinis] sarcinae is the baggage carried by the soldiers themselves, while impedimenta is the heavy baggage, tents, machines etc. Each man had to carry, in addition to his weapons and armour, some stakes [valli, cf. Hor. Epod. IX. 13 fert vallum et arma miles) for the construction of ramparts, saw, basket, spade, hatchet, cooking apparatus with provisions, usually for a fortnight. (From Kraner’s Einleitung.)
cum...possent] ‘ since they had no effective mounted force’.
ei ret] ‘this branch of the service’.
Digitized by Google96	DE	BELLO	GALLLCO. [Comm. II.
sed] ‘but all their strength lies in their infantry’.
teneris...interiectis] I adopt Schneider’s text, which Long follows, and to a certain extent his explanation. The trees had their tops lopped off when young (teneris); this made the branches grow out thickly sideways {crebris in latitudinem ramis enatis), these branches were then interlaced {in/lexis. Schneider says inflexis, quod de binis binarum arborum sibi adversis et in semet incurrentibus ramis accipiendum eandem significationem habet quam implicatis seu implexis: the interweaving of the branches of two opposite trees cannot at least be inferred from Caesar’s account), the intervals were then filled up with thornbushes by which a compact and impenetrable hedge was formed. See appendix.
instar] instar is probably an indeclinable noun in apposition to munimenta. See appendix.
ii non modo non] some editors omit the second non. It should be remembered that non modo can only stand for non modo non when a negative follows, as here ne quidem. Madv. on Cic. Fin. I. io.
Chap. 18.
loci] it is generally agreed that the high ground between the villages of Neuf-Mesnil on the north, and Hautmont on the south, bank of the Sambre, about two miles south-west of Maubeuge, was the spot selected for the Roman camp. On the right or south bank of the river between the villages of St Remi-mal-Bati and Louvroil is another hill named after the village of Hautmont.
acclivitate] as Mr Long says, acclivitas denotes the upward, declivitas the downward, slope of a hill.
adversus huic et contrarius] ‘ opposite to this and corresponding to it’, contrarius does not add much to the idea contained in adversus.
infimus] ‘at its base’. Caesar means, I think, that the slope was bare of trees for the first 200 paces, not that there was an extent of open ground 200 paces in width before one came to the slope.
introrsus perspici] for perspici with adverb of direction (introrsus — introversus), cf. 17 quo non modo 7ion intrari sed ne perspici quidem posset.
silvas] a considerable part of the hill is still occupied by the Bois du Quesnoy.
3c stationes] ‘outposts’, ‘videttes’.
32 videbantur] a true passive of video, * were seen*.
Chap. 19.
p. 42. 1 ratio ordoque] ‘general method and arrangement ’, cf. 22 rei militaris ratio atque ordo.
aliter ac Belgae detulerant] ‘different from what the Belgae had told ’, * different from the description given of it by the Belgae ’.
2 hoslt] see appendix.
Digitized by Googleduae legiones] the xilith and xivth, cf. 2; for the funditores and sagittarii cf. 10.
identidem] ‘ repeatedly\
quem ad finem] —ad eum finem ad quem. tr. Iit ‘nor did our men venture to pursue them in their retreat further than to the limit to which the stretch of open ground (loca aperta porrecta, the open ground outstretched) extended ’. ad finem follows both porrecta and pertinebant.
in silvas] these words must be taken with abditi and not with latebant: ‘who having hidden themselves in the wood were lying concealed \
ut constituerant] ‘just as they had formed in line*, ‘with the very formation that they had adopted within the woods and according to their mutual resolve *: the sentence scarcely admits of a literal translation ; the general sense is ‘they sallied forth {provolaverunt) just as they were’, i.e. without altering their formation. Cf. 23 ut constiterant. See appendix.
in manibus nostris] we should say ‘close at hand’, ‘just upon us*. Cf. Verg. G. I. 45 in manibus terrae.
Chap. 20.
vexillum] the vexillum, a red flag, was raised on or near the general’s tent as a signal for the men to hold themselves in readiness: cf. B.C. ill. 89 se vexillo signum daturum, bell. Alex. 45 vexillo sublato quo pugnandi dabat signum (Kraner).
5	signum tuba dandum] this was a signal for the soldiers to fall in.
7	aggeris] agger is here used of the material of which the earthwork
was constructed ; for this meaning cf. B. C. I 42 quod longius erat agger petendus ; in Greek as opposed to x^/ta the completed mound.
milites cohortandi] the exhortation was, if possible, never omitted; cf. Cic. Phil. v. 11 faciam igitur ut imperatores instructa acie solent: quanquam paratissimos milites ad proeliandum videanty ut eos tamen adhortentur.
signum dandum] the signal for the battle to commence: cf. 21 proelii committendi signum dedit.
temporis brevitas] in 21 and 33 we find temporis exiguitas.
subsidio] almost = ‘remedy’. Kr. qu. B. C. III. 70 his tantis malis haec subsidia succurrebant.
p. 43. 1 legatos] it should be remembered that the legati were not at this time permanently attached to the legions as they subsequently became.
quae videbantur] * what appeared (to them) needful9 ‘ the needful operations *.
Chap. 21.
necessariis rebus imperatis] * having issued instructions for the necessary measures ’.
Digitized by GOOgle98	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm. II.
quam in partem fors obtulit] cf. vn. 87 cohortes quas ex proximis praesidiis deductas fors obtulit, quam in partem = in eam partem quam. The ixth and xth legions were on the left, cf. 23.
devenit] devenio expresses ‘coming by chance’, cf. below quam quisque in partem casu devenit.
suae] ‘ their well-known \
sustinerent] ut must be supplied with this verb from the preceding clause; for the structure of the sentence cf. V. 34 ut coniciant neu... accedant et...cedant; B. C. III. 92 ut...exciperent neve...moverent aciem- que.. paterentur.
quam quo] — quam ut eo.
adigi] so Madvig (Adv. 11. 251 sqq) for the adiici of the mss : cf. n. on IV. 23.
alteram partem] ‘the opposite direction’, opposite, that is, to the direction in which he had gone before. He now came to the xilth and vnth legions : cf. 23.
pugnantibus occurrit] ‘he finds them already in action \
insignia accommodanda] ‘ putting on (‘fitting’) their decorations’.
induendas] when on the march the Roman soldier carried his helmet suspended from his arm or over his back.
tegimenta detrudenda] ‘thrusting off the coverings*. Both the Greeks and Romans had leather coverings for their shields, cf. Xen. An. 1. 2 16, Cic. N. D. 11. 37.
tempus defuerit] ‘ they had found no time *; the perfect defuerit cannot be adequately represented except by a pluperfect in English. A soldier entering upon an engagement may say to himself ‘ the enemy are so near that I have found no time to put on my helmet * or * the enemy are so near that I find no time ’, etc.; so a subsequent narrator of the event may say ‘ the enemy were so near that the soldier has found {defuerit, ‘ had found ’ suits the English idiom better) no time *, etc. or ‘the enemy were so near that the soldier found no time*, etc., in this latter case he would write deesset, which Caesar might very well have done here.
Chap. 22.
deiectusque collis] cf. 8 collis lateris delectus habebat, deiectusque collis is merely a farther definition of loci natura as Kraner points out and is not a separate independent enuntiation; this is sufficiently shown by the que. The student should remember the following rule ‘ when three or more coordinate words or clauses have to be stated, either (i) no conjunction is put as A, B, C, or (ii) each is connected with the preceding, as A et B et C, or (iii) the conjunction is omitted with the first members and que is annexed to the last as A, B, Cque: thus A, Bque et C would be quite unclassical, at least in prose. R § 2202.
diversae legiones] see appendix, for diversas in the sense of ‘ scattered * 4 parted ’ cf. 24 diversos dissipatosque.
quid opus esset] cf. n. on 1. 42.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANChap. 23.
acie] this is probably a genitive after parte. A. Gellius IX. 14 says that Caesar in his book de analogia expresses his opinion that the genitives die and specie should be used. cf. R. § 357. But acie might very well be an ablative here * in line * ‘ in their ranks \
33	transire non dubitaverunt] cf. n. on 2 dubitandum non existimavit
quin,
p. 44. 3 diversae] * apart from each other ’.
4	ex loco superiore] to be taken with profligatis.
summam imperii] ‘the chief command*, cf. n. on I. 41.
summum castrorum locum] the height occupied by the camp.
Chap. 24.
quos pulsos dixeram] Caesar means ‘who had been repulsed, as I have said * but by a slight confusion of thought and expression he writes ‘ whom I had described as repulsed ’. This, no doubt correct, explanation of the pluperfect is given by Kraner and Vielhaber, cf. 1, 28, IV. 27 quem demonstraveram praemissum ‘ who had been sent forward as I have shown ’.
adversis hostibus occurrebant] it would appear that before the Roman cavalry who had engaged the enemy on the right bank of the river and had been thrown into disorder and dispersed (19) could recross the river and return to the camp, the Nervii had already crossed the stream lower down and were attacking the camp on the high ground {summum castrorum locum 23), consequently the cavalry on their return met (‘ ran up against’ adversis occurrebant) the enemy who had crossed before them.
fugam petebant] fugam petere, as Schneider shows, is more common in poetry than in prose. Cf. Liv. ix. 23.
calones] ‘ suttlers * * camp-followers *.
decumana porta] the Roman camp was always constructed on definite principles. It was in the form of a square through which ran the via principalis terminating in the porta principalis dextra and the porta principalis sinistra; the gates on the other two opposite sides were called respectively the decumana and the praetoria porta. In the present case the decumana porta was on the side of the camp farthest removed from the river.
1 7	transisse conspexerant] ‘ had seen that they had crossed \
qui cum impedimentis veniebant] it will be remembered that the
impedimenta were coming up under the convoy of the two recently levied legions the xmth and xivth ; it was when they first appeared in sight that the enemy began their attack, 19.
quorum...singularis'] ‘whose valour is in high repute among the Gauls ’: cf. 8 propter eximiam opinionem virtutis.
UNIVERSITY OF MICHDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. II
Chap. 25.
Caesar...profectus] the narrative takes us back to 21 where we read
atque in alteram (i. e. dextram) partem item cohortandi causa profectus pugnantibus occurrit.
signis] apparently the colours of the several cohorts; see below on signiferoque interfecto.
ad pugnam impedimento] cf. n. on I. 25, where the same phrase occurs.
p. 45. i omnibus centurionibus] there were 6 centuriae in a cohort, each commanded by a centurio.
signiferoque interfecto] it is concluded from this passage that every cohort had a special signum, though the fact is not elsewhere mentioned in writers before the Empire (Kraner): cf. Nipperdey on Tac. An. I. 18. Each manipulus had a signum of its own, cf. Varro 1. lat. v. 88 manipulos exercitus minimas manus, quae unum sequuntur signum.
4	primipilo]	the first centurion of the first cohort was called primipilus.
Baculus was not killed, as we learn from in. 5.
deserto loco] ‘having quitted their posts’: see appendix, ab novissimis ‘in the rear’, so again, a few lines on.
neque...et] so in Greek oure...re are often used, ‘the enemy did not cease...and were pressing*.
9 vidit] this, like the vidit in line 1, follows on ubi. The greater part of this chapter from the beginning to uti possent consists of one long sentence made up of a protasis ubi suos...submitti posset and an apodosis scuto...uti possent, to which also belong the words Caesar...profectus at the beginning of the chapter: thus the second vidit would have been sufficient by itself, but the insertion of the first vidit makes the sentence easier to understand.
ab novissimis militi] ‘from a soldier in the rear ranks*: see appendix.
13 manipulos laxare] * open out the ranks of the maniples *.
operam navare] navare originally gnavare means ‘ to make known * ‘ to exhibit *; operam navare, lit. ‘ to exhibit zeal *, may be translated ‘ to do one’s best ’: the word is connected etymologically with 717iw/cw and its kindred words, cf. ignavia — ayvoia. Cf. Liv. vii. 16 fortiter in acie operam navaturos. Tacitus with his usual audacity of expression ventures on bellum navare, Hist. v. 25.
Chap. 26.
18 septimam legionem] this was one of the legions on the right wing exposed to the assaults of the Nervii.
20	conversa signa]	cf. I. 25. Caesar placed the two legions back to back,
as it were, so that they fronted opposite ways; hence the words conversa signa though applied to the two legions are only strictly applicable to cne of them. This is Schneider’s explanation, accepted by Kraner but
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANCapp. 25—28]
not by Long (App. 2), whose explanation (taken from Roesch) of the movements of the two legions is almost too elaborate to be probable.
in novissimo agmine] ‘ in the extreme rear of the line of march*.
praelio...incitato] ‘having quickened their pace on receiving intelligence of the battle *.
Titus Labienus] it will be remembered that the ixth and xth legions, the latter commanded by Labienus, had driven the Atrebates in confusion across the river. Caesar now says that they had succeeded in taking the enemies* entrenchments on the hill of Hautmont, and from this position they were able to see how their comrades were faring across the river.
nihil...fecerunt] lit. ‘left nothing undone to effect speed* ‘made all possible haste *: the phrase reliqui facere is only used with a negative.
Chap. 27.
qui procubuissent] a little less definite than qui procubuerant.
p. 46. 3 inermes] in I. 40 the form inermus is used.
in extrema spe saint is] this occurs again in 33, ‘in their utter despair of safety * (or ‘ success ’).
13 quae...redegerat] cf. IV. 3 hos Suebi multo humiliores infirmioresque redegerunt, the only other instance of this use of redigere = reddere that I can find quoted from any classical author; redigere aliquem ad aliquid ‘ to reduce a person (or thing) to ’ is common enough; see beginning of next chapter.
Ciiap. 28.
15	ad internicionem] cf. I. 13. Notwithstanding this great defeat the
Nervii were able to furnish 5000 fighting-men in the war of independence B.c. 52: cf. vii. 75.
nomine] ‘ power * as in the common expression nomen Romanum.
aestuaria] the word is defined by Festus as meaning those places quae mare vicissim tum accedit tum recedit: if this is universally correct and aestuaria here really denotes ‘ inlets * or * creeks *, and not merely ‘ marshes *, it will be necessary to suppose that the Nervii had deposited their non-combatants somewhere near the estuary of the Scheldt: cf. n. on 16.
coniectos dixeramus] cf. n. on 24 quos pulsos dixeram.
2 2 LX] the Nervii had promised 50000 men at the beginning of the war, cf. 4.
vix ad quingentos\—ad vix quingentos: cf. I. 6 vix qua singuli, III. 4 vix ui rebus.
uti] * retain possession of’.
2O	ut...prohiberent] * to stay themselves and their adherents from doing
any injury or harm to them ’.(the conquered Nervii).
iniuria et malcfcio] these words are thus united in I. 79.DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. II.
A brief recapitulation of the chief incidents of this battle may be useful. The two armies were encamped on rising ground on opposite sides of the Sambre near Maubeuge, the Belgae on the SE., the Romans on the NW., bank. The Atrebates occupied the right of the Belgic position, to one looking towards the river, the Viromandui the centre and the Nervii the left. The right of the Roman position (opposite the Nervii) was occupied by the Vllth and Xllth legions, the centre by the Vlllth and Xlth, the left (opposite the Atrebates) by the ixth and xth; the xillth and xivthwere in charge of the baggage-train some distance behind. The battle began by the Roman cavalry crossing the river and engaging the Belgic cavalry. While these were skirmishing the Belgae caught sight of the Roman baggage-train appearing some way off over the crest of the opposite hill: acting on a preconcerted plan they at once broke from their positions, scattered the Roman cavalry, crossed the river and burst with terrific fury upon the Roman legions on the opposite side. The latter, encouraged by Caesar, sustained the attack as well as they could. Soon the ixth and xth succeeded in driving back the Atrebates across the river, crossed it themselves and attacked and actually occupied the Belgic camp: about the same time the vuith and Xlth had driven the Viromandui down the slope and were fighting on the banks of the river; thus the whole of the front and left of the Roman position was left unprotected. The Nervii seeing this divided their attack, their right making an assault on the front of the Roman camp, while their left went to the left of the vnth and xnth legions (with whom it will be remembered that the Nervii were engaged) in order to take them on their right and exposed flank (latus apertum). At this time the Xillth and xivthwere coming up behind at a rapid pace, and, besides this, Labienus with the ixth and xth on the opposite bank, seeing the critical state of affairs, hastened to recross the river. This double succour in front and behind completely turned the day, and the Nervii notwithstanding their magnificent bravery were utterly routed.
Chap. 29.
29 ex itinere] * stayed their march and returned home’.
unum oppidum\ Goler has concluded with great probability that the site of this oppidum is to be found on the hill Falhize, a steep and rocky plateau on the north bank of the Meuse, just opposite the town of Huy in the province of Liege, about halfway between Namur and Li£ge, and close to the junction of the small river Mehaigne with the Meuse. This hill, of an oblong shape, is steep and almost inaccessible on the SE. and SW. sides; on the NW. side the ground is less precipitous, being broken by a few ravines, while on the NE. the plateau, instead of terminating in an abrupt fall, has a gently-descending slope for some little distance, after which the ground again rises till it merges with the range of hills covered with the Bois du Huy; the width of this end where the slope begins is about 230 feet; this is a sufficiently near approximation to the width of 200 feet given by Caesar. Across the plateau are some slight earthworks, marking no doubt the line of the double wrall flanked by a ditch which the besieged constructed.33	despectusque]	cf. vii. 36 collibus occupatis qua despici poterat, 79 erat
ex oppido Alesia despectus in campum. See appendix.
p. 47. 2 duplici altissimo muro] ‘ with a double wall of great height ’.
praeacutas] ‘sharpened at the end’ ‘pointed’.
prognati] “the word which occurs again in VI. 18 is poetical and in the older prose is only found in Cael. ap. Cic. Fam. VIII. 15 ” (Kraner).
iter in provinciam] inB.C. 102; cf. Momms. III. 90.
agere ac portare] these two words are also found together in B.C. II. 25 animadvertit multa undique portari atque agi plenissimis viis quae repentini tumultus timore ex agris in urbem conferantur. Gaius says ferri proprie dicimus quae quis suo corpore baiulat, portari ea quae in iumento secum ducit, agi ea quae animalia sunt; this distinction though far from universally valid may possibly apply here ; or we may perhaps regard the phrase as an example of those pairs of words in which each word merges its independent meaning in the general signification given by the two combined: cf. kcl\6s Kayados, agere vertere, fusus fugatus, purusputus, ‘ safe and sound etc.
custodiam] ‘custodians’; ‘together with these {una) they left a guard (praesidium) of 6000 men’.
10	alias...alias]	‘at one time’...‘at another time’.
defenderent] ‘ward off’; cf. n. on I. 44.
Chap. 30.
vallo...circummuniti] pedum should no doubt be read with the
inferior MSS for passuum: ‘the natural line of circumvallation which touches the river at both ends is exactly 15000 pedes long’ (A. v. Kam- pen): it is noticeable that Caesar says nothing about a river, but would rather lead us to infer that the town was completely surrounded by the wall in question.
16 vineis actis] the vineae (cf. 12) were pushed forward to serve as protections for the men while engaged in constructing the agger, which was a raised dam begun some little distance from the oppidum and carried up to it at right angles. The object of the dam was to serve as an inclined platform up which the turris was to be wheeled till it was brought near enough to command the town.
turrim procul constitui] ‘ a tower in course of erection some distance off’.
quod] ‘ at the idea of so great a contrivance being set up so great a distance off’. The thought of the Gauls, not merely an actual fact, has to be expressed, hence the subjunctive instrueretur instead of instruebatur.
praesertim] the word qualifies homines tantulae staturae, ‘men too of such little stature’, or ‘especially as they were men of such little stature’.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. II.
omnibus Gallis] all the Gauls without exception, whether Belgae, Celtae or Aquitani, plerumque ‘as a rule’: for plerumque omnibus Schneider, qu. V. 57, equiles plerumque omnes,
in muro se posse] Caesar, as Long remarks, seems to represent the Gauls as crying derisively, ‘how are such little fellows going to lift that tower on to our wall?* as though suggesting with some irony that the only possible way of taking so strongly fortified a place would be to put the tower on the top of. the duplex murus. See appendix.
Chap. 31.
locuti]	this is not for loculi sunt, but is the participle.
existimare] se must be supplied, as also with the verbs permittere and petere ac deprecari.
29 petere ac deprecari\ petere is simply to make a request, deprecari is to beg a person not to do something; our ‘deprecate’ does not cover quite the same ground as deprecari: tr. ‘beg as a favour’.
pro...mansuetudine'] the same phrase has already occurred in 14.
5,0	audirent]	= audimus, in or. rect.	statuisset=statueris.
33 traditis armis] =si traderentur arma.
possent] posse would have done equally well, cf. n. on 14 consuerint.
Chap. 32.
p. 48. 5 si prius, quant] Kr. qu. Cic. de Off. I. 35 tum ei qui armis positis ad imperatorum fidem confugient, quamvis murum aries percusserit,, recipiendi. Cicero would have been less rigorous than Caesar in dealing with a besieged foe.
10 facere dixerunt] ‘they said that they were doing’; facere must not be translated as if it were facturos, imperata facere is the regular term for surrender.
muri aggerisque] murus is the wall of the oppidum, agger the Roman earthwork which had been advanced up to the brink of the fosse: the deep ravine-like space between the two was nearly filled up with the Gallic weapons.
Chap. 33.
praesidia]	they thought the Romans would remove the sentinels
from the vallum and castella forming the line of circumvallation, or that at any rate a less vigilant watch would be kept.
scutis...intextis] as Kraner points out, it is not clear whether intextis
agrees with scutis and ex is to be supplied with viminibus, the meaning then being ‘shields made of bark or woven out of osiers’, or whether viminibus intextis is an ablative absolute, in which case tr. ‘shields made of bark or by the interlacing of osiers’.
Digitized by GOOglCqua minime arduus] we do not know where the Gauls intended to
break through the Roman line of circumvallation. We gather from the present passage that most of the encompassing lines was on high ground, otherwise the Gauls tould not be said to have looked out for a spot where the ascent was least difficult. Of course the first thing for the Gauls to do was to descend from their own stronghold; this they might do by the ravines on the north-west face of the hill.
ex proximis castellis] there were castella at short intervals along the whole line of circumvallation.
eo] to the place threatened.
ut a viris fortibus pugnari debuit\ * as brave men were bound to fight*.
iniquo loco] ablative of attendant circumstances: the ground was unfavourable to the Gauls because of the ascent required before they could reach the Roman lines.
contra eost qui] ‘ against assailants who*: the statement is perfectly general, hence the subjunctive iacerent.
turribusque\ the castella previously mentioned; quite different from the turris mobilis (cf. 30) with which the Romans were going to besiege the town.
cum in una...consisteret] Caesar seems to have forgotten that he
* had already said in extrema spe salutis.
ad\ ad is here adverbial = ‘ about*.
p. 49. i sectionem oppidi universam] 'the whole booty of the town without exception*, section properly ‘division’, came to be applied to booty that was sold and ‘ divided ’ among the conquerors.
numerus] numerus is followed here by a double genitive, capitum and milium, as in I. 29, where see note.
Chap. 34.
Venetos] a powerful maritime state who occupied the region now comprised in the department of Morbihan. They broke out into revolt and were subdued by Caesar in the following year, B. C. 56. Cf. in. 8 for some account of their power: they possessed several islands off the coast insulas complures Venetoru?n quae et Veneticae appellantur, Plin. IV. 19, 2 quoted by Desjardins. Their name survives in Vannes.
Venellos] this, and not Unellos, is shown by Gliick to be the proper spelling. The district occupied by this tribe corresponds more or less with the department of Somme in the north-west of Normandie.
Osismos] the habitation of this tribe is to be sought in the department of Finisterre.
Curiosolitas] the name of this people may still be traced in the town of Corseul in the department of Cotes du Nord. Near Corseul are the remains of a Roman temple, the Fanum Martis. The name Curiosolitae has been found on an inscription discovered at Corseul: this should be substituted probably for Curiosolites in VII. 75.
p. C. I.	8DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. II.
6 Esuvios] this spelling is found on some small Gallic coins discovered in Jersey. Their name is still traceable in Essey. Their territory corresponded to the central and western part of the departments of Calvador and Ome. Desjardins thinks that Bayeaux (Augustomagus) was within their limits.
Aulercos] of this important family there were three main branches, the Aul. Diablintes in western Maine, the Cenomani in eastern Maine, and the Aul. Eburovices in the neighbourhood of Evreux in the department of Eure. It is to these last that Caesar here alludes. Those who wish to know more of this tribe, the history of which is somewhat obscure, should consult Desjardins II. 490 sqq.
Redones] a tribe in the neighbourhood of Rennes (which is named after them) in the department of Ille-et-Vilaine.
Chap. 35.
10 belli opinio] ‘so high an estimate of the war*, and of its serious consequences for themselves.
Illyricumque] Caesar had been entrusted in 59 B. C. with the charge of this province together with the two Gauls for a period of five years. Cf. n. on V. 1.
Carnutes"] an important and powerful Keltic tribe occupying a district roughly speaking coextensive with the province of Orleanais. One of their strongholds Cenabum afterwards civitas Aureliatiorum is the modern Orleans.
Andes] these people have given their name to Anjou. The form Andecavi, or Andicavi, which Desjardins thinks is the oldest form, is found in Pliny, and also Andegavi which marks the transition to the modem Anjou.
Turones] the Turones occupied the department of Indre-et-Loire and have given their name to the department Touraine and the town Tours. In this district there are still abundant traces of the old Gaulish nomenclature; see the long list of names in Desjardins.
hibernacula] this reading has more authority than hibema: “only here in Caesar. Sail. lug. 103 exercitu in hibernaculis composito; Nep. Ages. 3, Eum. 8: properly ‘winter-tents’ ‘winter encampment’(Liv. v. 2 hibernacula aedificari coepta) while hiberna is the winter-quarters generally, the place where the troops wintered Kraner.
18 dierum] see appendix.
supplicatio] a solemn thanksgiving, which usually lasted for 3 or 4 days. Caesar says that a supplicatio of 15 days had never been granted to anyone before: in 52 one of 20 days was decreed in his honour: vii. 90. Cf. Diet. Ant. s. v.APPENDIX.
BOOK I
Dr Andreas Frigell, the most recent and trustworthy investigator of the codices of the Bellum Gallicum, gives the following distribution of the more important MSS in order of merit. Cf. L. Vielhaber in Zeitschrift fur die Oesterreichischen Gymnasien, 1864, p. 27: H.J. Heller in Philologus XVII and xix :
FIRST CLASS
M Parisinus (P), the tenth, or possibly the end of the ninth, century. Romanus (R), the tenth, or the beginning of the eleventh century.
(1b) Amstelodamensis (A), same date as Parisinus.
Moysiacensis (M), the twelfth century.
To this class may also be added:
Vossianus (V), the eleventh century?
Codex mutilus, the tenth century.
SECOND CLASS.
(a) Thuaneus (T), the twelfth century?
Leidensis (L).
(£) Ursinianus (U), the twelfth century?
Hauniensis (H), the fourteenth century?
THIRD CLASS
Gottorpiensis (G).
Jadrensis (J), dated 1437.
Colbertinus (C), the fifteenth century.
Borbonianus (Borb) the fifteenth century.
Barberinianus (Barb), the fourteenth century.
P. 2, 1. 28, the MSS have without exception ad eas res conficiendas : the repetition is intolerably harsh; I have therefore ventured to omit conficiendas supposing it to have crept in from the previous sentence : this is at least a gentler remedy than Frigell’s who only leaves Orgetorix sibi legationem ad civitates suscepit, a reading which Heller appears to approve, Philologus XIX. 472.
P. 3,1. 10, according to Nipperdey A (manu secunda) inserts imperio after potiri. See note. Vielh. Zt xv. 29.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANAPPENDIX,.
P. 3,1. 31, according to Nipperdey A has finitimis suis (Vielh.).
P. 4, 1 32, there is some trace of sub iugo in MSS. Cf. Livy III. 28 sub hoc iugo dictator Aequos misit.
P. 8, 1. 4, I retain the reading of all the MSS. Kraner after Dinter writes ut magis virtute contenderent quam dolo aut insidiis niterentur. Cf. Heller, Phil. XIX. 501, whose explanation I have adopted.
P. 9, 1. 7, Frigell writes audacius subsistere, nonnunquam ex - novissimo, etc., but ex is only found in a late ed. of 1514.
P.10, 1. 4, quod debeant ...praestare si. So Heller, Kraner and others: for this use of praestare cf. vii. r, 10, 17: by a natural mistake praestare got taken over to the previous sentence; this caused the insertion of satius esse after perferre in some late edds., and the alteration of perferre into praeferre in T L.
P. 10, 1. 6, R A M V T U J C have dubitare debeant strangely enough.
P. 10, 1. 10, necessariam rem T, necessaria rem A M V U C, necessario rem J: see Heller, Phil. xxxi. 319.
.	P.12,1.	31,	PRAMVTU agree in Lucio Labieno. Was Lucio
written in the margin over against L. Sullae, whence it was transferred to the wrong place ?
P. 13, L 31, I retain veteranorum the reading of the MSS : so Heller, but Vielhaber insists on veteranarumy and is followed by Kraner. After this word all MSS have ita uti supra, then R V T U C J have se in, P sed iiiy A M supra ; sed in ; all mss have collocari and compleri et interea ; the reading of the mss then is ‘... veteranorum ita uti supra se (or sed) in summo iugo duas legiones, quas in Gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia collocari ac totum montem hominibus compleri et interea sarcinas in unum locum conferri et eum ab his qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit. I follow Heller and Kraner in retaining this with the omission of the words ita uti supra as originally a marginal gloss, and reading sed before in summo iugo. Frigell retains ita uti supra se, and reads conlocaret and complerety beginning a fresh sentence with inter ea.
P. 20,1.11, molimento: this is no doubt right; the best mss have emolumento, the e having come from the previous atque, emolumentum is said to be used in the sense of ‘ exertion * in Varro de re rustica ill. 14 1.
P. 22, 1. 18, dicebant, wrongly omitted by Frigell.
P. 25, 1. 33, vexerat. V T L U J C B have devexerat, which can hardly be right.
P.27, 1. 18, fratres Aeduos appellatos.	So PRAMV; the rest
insert amicos or et amicos almost at random.
P. 28,1. 29, e suis legatis. Kraner brackets the word legatis, on the ground that legatum esuis (1. 32) can only mean ‘an envoy from among his men*, ‘ one of his men as an envoy ’, while e suis legatis must mean ‘ one of his legati \
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANAPPENDIX,
P. 31, 1. 16, et desuper vulnerarent, this is the reading of all the MSS, and is, I believe, perfectly correct; see note. Kraner rejects the words, refusing to accept Heller’s explanation, PhiL XXXI. 538: see too Vielhaber in Zt., 1864, p. 36.
P. 31, 1. 27. Nipperdey needlessly adopts pepererunt, the cj. of* Heinsius for repererunt,
P. 31,1. 33, utraeque in ea fuga perierunt, duae filiae harum, altera, etc.: so all the MSS except T U, which have utraque, U also having periit, Kraner very needlessly follows A. Hug in reading utraque in ea fuga periit, fuerunt duae filiae: harum altera occisa, altera capta est,
P. 32, L 14, Ubii] so C, the rest have ubi, the MSS show the same variation twice in vi. 9; if Ubii be read senserunt must be omitted as a gloss consequent on the need of a verb after ubi. Vielhaber and Frigell retain ubi...senseruntt Kraner and Heller adopt Ubii,
BOOK II
P. 36, L 31, for periclitabaUir V T L U H C have strangely sollicitationibus exquirebat,
P. 40, 1.19, the words ad luxuriam pertinentium are omitted by PRAMTG.
P. 40,1. 21, animos eorum et remitti virtutem. May not eorum be gen. after virtutem and mean animorum ? Madvig strikes out the word as a manifest gloss, so Heller, who says that a copyist inserted it “vielleicht ein Weinliebhaber der die Wirkung des Weins nicht so allgemein verdiichtigt wissen wollte”! Vielhaber is inclined to approve of Eberz’ cj. virorum: should hominum be read?
P. 41, 1. 18, P R A M V G J C B have atque in latitudinem ramis enatis, so Frigell: J V T L U C insert atque inflexis crebrisque [crebris]). Kraner retains que. I believe the reading of J to be correct, so Schneider and Long.
P. 41, 1. 20, munimenta. Madvig, Adv. 11. 249, says ‘nemo bonus scriptor instar pro adverbio posuit (tanquam murus), sed aut cum verbo esse (esse instar alicuius rei) aut pro obiecto (habere instar alicuius rei) aut appositione adiunctum (epistola instar voluminis, hoc est, volumen aequans’; he therefore reads here ut instar muri hae sepes praeberet; but as instar may be used in apposition, as Madvig shows, Kraner is perhaps right in retaining mutiimenia. P R A M V have munimentis, which can hardly be right.
P. 42, 1. 2, there are some traces of quod ad hostes in the MSS, but Caesar only uses a dative with appropinquare, so that Kraner is probably right in reading hosti.
P. 42, L 16, Vielhaber wishes to retain the it a, which all the MSS show before either constituerant or ut.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANno	ADDENDA.
P. 43, 1. 22, diversae legiones, Madvig’s cj. for diversis legionibus, which Kraner retains.
P. 45, 1. 6, all MSS have deserto (or desertos) praelio. I follow Kraner in accepting Klussman’s deserto loco. W. Paul suggests desperado proelio.
P. 46, 1. 33, all MSS have despectusque. Vielh. cj. deiectusque.
P. 47, 1. 22, T L U C have muro, P R A M V J muros, then all agree in sese collocare confiderent. Kraner turrim moturos sese confiderent. For sese I venture to write se posse: cf. I. 23 posse confiderent, III, 9 posse confidebant, v. 27 posse confidat, vi. 40 posse confidunt.
P. 49,1. 18, dierum. So Frigell, Dinter, Heller: Kraner writes in dies. All mss have dies, which cannot be right. The corruption is easily accounted for.
ADDENDA.
BOOK I.
P. 2, 1. 16, Kraffert suggests qua ex parte re, comparing vi. 34 quae tamen ex parte res ad salutem exercitus pertinebat.
P. 6, 1. 2, Kraffert proposes to read Sontiatum for Santonum, which would satisfy the geographical requirements of the passage. The Sontiates dwelt on the south bank of the Garonne, and have left their name in Sos.
P. 6, 1.17, it was on the ides of April that Caesar refused to allow the Helvetii passage through the Province, and it is likely that he started for Italy almost immediately. Napoleon reckons that his journey to Italy, his sojourn there while enrolling the legions, and the return journey on which he met with opposition from mountain tribes, could not have occupied less than 60 days, which would give the second week of June as the time of his arrival at some town of the Segusiavi (probably Lyons).
P. 7, 1. 4, lintribus] lintres were roughly constructed flat-bottomed boats of the ferry-boat type. An earlier form of the word is lunter which may have lost a p, thus corresponding to the Greek irXuvrrip though with a different meaning.
P. 7,1. 12, the position of the Tigurini is doubtful. Some suppose that they dwelt south of the Rhine and the lake of Constance and gave their name to Zurich : others place them south of the lake of Neuchatel, near to which is Avenches or Wiflisberg, the ancient Aventicum (Tac. Hist. i. 68), a place rich in Roman remains, and once apparently one of the chief oppida of the Helvetii.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANADDENDA.	in
P. 9, 1.10, either pabulationibus or populationibus should perhaps be omitted.
P. 10, 1.10, Pluygers is perhaps right in reading necessario rein and removing coactus as a gloss.
P. 14,1. 13, infixisset is suggested by Hermann and supported by Kochly.
P. 14, 1.18, spatio is inserted after passuum by Dinter, Dittenberger and Holder ; needlessly, I think.
P. 15, 1. 2, for rotas Meiser and Pluygers with some probability suggest rhedas or redas, cf. 51 aciem suam redis et carris circumdederunt.
P. 18, 1. 16, Gliick, Keltische Namen 121 foil., proposes ad Mage- tobrigam, a name which he explains as = collis amplus, but the value of his learned discussion of the word is said to be impaired by the fact that he relied on a spurious inscription and a mistaken local identification.
P. 22, 1. 5, the strange Alduasdubis of the MSS is due to the name Dubis having the alternative reading Duas written over against it in the margin with the syllable al. i.e. alii (sc. scribunt) prefixed to it. For this not infrequent cause of corruption in mss see Frigell, vol. ill. pt. 1. p. 32 foil.
P. 25, 1. 10, Kraffert, Whitte and Madvig prefer existimaret\
BOOK II.
P. 35, 1. 4, Galbam\ the Keltic and Latin proper name Galba, together with cognate words, galbus, gilvus, bilis, helvus, %6Xos, gelb, yellow, probably come from \Jghar signifying ‘ brightness,’ and as the ideas of fatness and a smooth shining surface are easily connected (as in the Psalms: “They wax fat, they shine”), so we find the two meanings associated in this family of words, cf. Angermann, * Die Romischen Mannernamen auf a* in Curtius’ Studien v.; Corssen, Aussprache I. 519. Suetonius (Galba 3) says that some think that the first of the Sulpician gens to bear the name was so called quod praepinguis fuerit visus quem Galbam Galli vocant: vel contra quod tam exilis quam sunt animalia quae in aesculis nascuntur appellanturque Galbae.
P. 42,1. 24, the clause quod erat...oporteret is ejected as spurious by many critics, but without adequate reason.
P. 47,1. 9, obitum] Kraner calls attention to the use of this word here for the destruction of a race; it is properly used of the death of an individual.