p. 1. i The events narrated in the first six chapters of this book happened in the winter of 57-56 B.C.
duodecima:] Caesar had at this time 8 legions in Gaul numbered from VII to xiv inclusive.
Nantuates] from 6 we learn that the Nantuates were situated between the Veragri, whose chief town was Octodurus (Martigny), and the Allobroges, and therefore occupied the valley of the Rhone between S. Maurice and Villeneuve. Hence it is difficult to suppose that they are identical with the tribe of the same name mentioned in iv. 10 as bordering on the Rhine near its source : see my note on that passage. M. Desjardins suggests with some probability that the original tribe may have been broken up into two portions at the time of the migration of one of the four Helvetic cantons, the pagus Tigurinus; cf. I. 12.
Veragros] Octodurus (Martigny) was the chief oppidum of the Veragri who appear to have been more powerful than the other neighbouring tribes and to have occupied some of the adjacent mountain region.
Sedunos] the Seduni occupied the Rhone valley in the neighbourhood of Sittenor Sion (Sedunum) where an inscription has been found bearing the words civitas Sedunorum. These three tribes here mentioned, together with the Viberi, formed the civitates quatuor vallis Poeninae of an inscription on a monument at S. Maurice erected in honour of Drusus son of Tiberius, who died 23A.D.
iter per Alpes] the Great S. Bernard route leading from Martigny to
Aosta (Augusta Praetoria Salassorum, founded 20 b.c.) by the Val Entremont and the Val du Grand S. Bernard. By periculo Caesar means danger from the lawless mountain tribes rather than the natural perils of the route, though one can well understand that these were considerable in days when there was no friendly hospice.
igitized by GOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. III.
portoriis] dues levied by the mountaineers.
in Nantuatibus] possibly at Agaunum, now S. Maurice.
Octodurus]	occupied apparently the site of Martigny le Bourg,
about one kilometre south of Martigny la Ville, on the banks of the Dranse.
ad hiemandum] see appendix.
ab his] the ab follows vacuam not relictam: ‘left free from them’; cf. II. 12 vacuum ab defensoribus, B.C. I. 31 vacuas ab imperiis.
Chap. 2.
p. 2.	4 ut...caperent] this clause is explanatory of id, accidere is used
here as elsewhere of an unforeseen or unfavourable event.
neque eam plenissimam] ‘and that not fully complete’. The reason for its not being plenissima is given by the following words detractis cohortibus duabus etc., ‘inasmuch as two cohorts had been taken from it and several individuals’. The two cohorts were stationed among the Nantuates.
singillatim] equivalent to singulis. Both occur in Cic. Phil. II. 92 neque solum singulis venibant immunitates, sed etiam populis universis : civitas non iam singillatim, sed provinciis totis dabatur.
15 finitimae provinciae] the province of Gallia Narbonensis. sibi] persuasum habere is generally used without sibi.
Chap. 3.
16 opus hibernorum] these words denote the winter head-quarters as a whole, while munitiones are the several works and defences composing them.
20 consilio] a council of war, composed probably of the tiibuni militum and the centuriones primorum ordinum, i.e. the eight centurions in command of the eight cohorts here encamped.
subsidio veniii] supply posset from the following possent.
27 ad salutem contenderent] this expression seems to stand midway between such a phrase as contendere ad oppidum, where a definite locality is to be reached, and contendere ad laudem, ad gloriam, where contendere means simply ‘strive to attain’. Here salutem almost means ‘a place of safety’.
Chap. 4.
vise ut] for the misplacement of vix cf. I. 6; II. 28.
eis rebus ...administrandis] translate freely, ‘for ordering and arranging the proposed means of defence’.
33 gaesa] long heavy javelins : the word is of Keltic origin. Cf. Verg. Aen. VIII. 661 duo quisque Alpina coruscant | gaesa manu.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIACapp. i—6]
p, 3* i integris viribus] ‘ while their vigour was unimpaired ’.
2 ex loco superiore] trom the raised earthworks of the Roman camp.
7 non modo] for non modo non: the second non is only omitted when a negative follows (as here ne quidem), and then only when the predicate is common to both clauses. It would not be correct to omit the non from such a sentence as non modo non interfectus est sed ne levissimum quidem vulnus accepit, where each of the two clauses has its distinct predicate. In the sentence before us facultas dabatur belongs to both clauses.
sui recipiendi] for sui where se might be expected cf. my note on v. 38; in the other examples from Caesar sui strictly represents the acc. pi. se, here it represents the acc. sing.
Chap. 5.
primi pili centurio] the centurion of the first century of the Triarii,
also called primipilus, as in II. 25 where the exploits of Baculus in the campaign against the Nervii are mentioned ; cf. vi. 38.
experirentur] the imperfect is admissible because accumtnt and docent are historic presents.
centurionibus] in the 8 cohorts there would be 48 centurions, there being 60 centuries, and consequently 60 centurions, in a legion.
certioresfacit] used here rather in the sense of ‘orders* than ‘informs’.
tela missa exciperent] excipere frequently used of awaiting or receiving an attack here denotes watching and avoiding or parrying missile weapons: cf. I. 52 impetum gladiorum exceperunt.
Chap. 6.
sui colligendi] cf. note on 4 sui recipiendi.
in spem venerant] ‘had entertained the hope*.
32 armis exutis] ‘stripped of their arms’, ‘disarmed*, armis is abl. after exutis, cf. v. 51 omnes armis exuit.
p. 4. i atque...videbat] lit. ‘and remembered that he had entered his winter-quarters with one plan (but) saw that he had met with far other issues’. The repetition of alius serves to mark the contrast; he had wished for one thing and found another. Translate more freely ‘and saw on recalling the past that he had met with issues widely differing from the design with which he had entered winter-quarters*. The reading videbat is preferable to viderat; see appendix.
demorante] demoror is used elsewhere by Caesar; only once by Cicero.
legionem] of course he picked up on his way the two cohorts stationed among the Nantuates.
inde in Allobroges] after quitting the Rhone valley he would skirt the S. bank of the lake of Geneva. He may have wintered at Vienna (Vienne) the chief town of the Allobroges.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIADE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. III.
Chap. 7.
9 superatis Belgis] the subjugation of the Belgae is narrated in Bk. II, the expulsion of the Germans under Ariovistus in Bk. I.
Illyricumj	the province of Illyricum was entrusted to Caesar along
with the two Gauls for five years in 59 B. c. In April 56 b. c. Caesar was at Luca where he had an interview with Pompey and Crassus, the latter of whom he had previously met at Ravenna. The result of the conference was that Pompey and Crassus were to be nominated consuls for the ensuing year and Caesar’s command was to be prolonged for another five years. Cf. Plut. Caes. 21 ; Cic. Ep. Fam. 1. 9; ad Q. Fr. II. v (Wesenberg); Suet. Caes. 24.
regiones cognoscere] ‘make himself acquainted with the country*.
P. Crassus] son of M. Licinius Crassus the triumvir.
proximus mare Oceanum] ‘very near the Ocean*: the Andes were not contiguous to the sea : proximus is not used with an acc. in Cicero ; Caesar has it with the dative as well, cf. 11 Treveros qui proximi flumini Rheno sunt.
Andibus] this tribe has given its name to Anjou. See my note on II. 35*
praefectos tribunosque militum] the praefecti were the officers of the sociiy the tribuni militum officers of the legion, six being attached to each legion. Cf. notes on 1. 39.
Esuvios] for these three tribes see my notes on 11. 34. Napoleon on no satisfactory grounds proposes to read Venellos for Venetos.
Chap. 8.
Britanniam] there seems to have been a good deal of intercourse between Gaul and Britain in Caesar’s time though the Gauls knew little of the interior of the island. It was visited chiefly by merchants who confined their traffic to the dwellers on the coast: IV. 20. The Britons usually furnished auxiliaries in the Gallic wars : infra 9, IV. 20. In VI. 13 Caesar tells us that the cultus of the Druids originated in Britain and that those who desired a more accurate acquaintance with its mysteries were in the habit of visiting the island for that purpose.
scientia atque usu] almost ‘theoretical and practical knowledge*.
reliquos antecedunt] Cicero Off. I. 105 has quantum natura hominis pecudibus antecedat, Brut. 82. “Caesar has praecedere with the acc. (B. G. 1. 1) and also antecedere, the latter 7 times and never with the dative” (Seyffert).
impetu] ‘fury* ‘impetuousness*. The words atque aperto have an awkward sound in their present position though there is no need to suspect their genuineness. Perhaps one may translate freely, ‘and since there are but few harbours, and those occupied by themselves, breaking the coast-line of their wild and shelterless sea, they have made tributaries of nearly all who navigate it*.
26 fit initium] Caesar means that the Veneti first set the example of detaining the Roman legati. This explanation is due to Schneider.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIACapp. 7—9]
29	ut sunt...consilia] * with the sudden impulsiveness of Gauls in forming
their plans’. Caesar frequently speaks of the fickleness and impulsiveness of the Gallic character. The word repentinus is well illustrated in Lewis and Short. For the structure of the sentence cf. Tac. An. I. 28 ut sunt mobiles ad supei'stitionem perculsae semel mentes ‘with the usual proneness to superstition of minds once terrorstruck ’: Cic. Tuse. I. 108 permulta alia colligit Chrysippus, ut est in omni historia curiosus ‘ with his usual curiosity in all matters of history’.
per suos principes] ‘among their chief men’.
33 omnis] I take this to be for omnes and not genitive agreeing with fortunae though that would make good sense. Then for the position of the word between eundem and exitum> cf. VI. 40 eundem omnes ferant casum.
p. 5.	2 acceperant] the indicative in a dependent relative clause is unusual,
cf. however v. 11 and vn. 78. See appendix.
Chap. 9.
9 institui] ‘appointed’, coniparari ‘collected’. Kraner points out that it would be more difficult to provide a sufficient supply of nautae and gubernatores than of remiges.
cum primum] Caesar was at Luca in April so it is probable that he did not reach the army before May.
14 quod..fuisset] this clause does not contain a direct statement of the writer but is a part of the thought of the Gauls, hence the subjunctive fuisset, ad omnes nationes ‘among’, or ‘in the sight of, all nations’. For the sanctity of legati cf. Dionys. Hal. XI. 25 etrri 8k 7ravrojv lepwra- tov re Kal TipuurraTOV 6 Trpea^evTTjs irapb. Pwfiaiois, k£ovalav fxkv apxovros £x<*>v Kal 8vvafj.Lv, aavKlav 8k Kal <re/3cur/jlov lepkcos and other passages quoted in S. D. A. ‘legatus’.
multum confidebant] multum confidere occurs again in 25.
concisa] ‘intersected’.
neque] the negative of course belongs only to posse not to confidebant * neque posse confidebant=et non posse confidebant.
ac iam...acciderent] ‘and even supposing that everything turned out contrary to expectation’.
26 concluso mari] such as the Mediterranean with which the Romans were most familiar.
Osismos] the Osismi occupied a district corresponding to the department of Finistere. The Lexovii have left their name in Lisieux formerly Noviomagus in Normandy. The name of the Namnetes survives in Nantes formerly Condivincum. Nothing is known about the Ambiliati ; they are provisionally placed by Napoleon on the S. bank of the Loire below the Namnetes and the Andes. The Morini occupied N. Picardy. The Diablintres were a division of the Aulerci and occupied Western Maine: see my note on 11. 34. The Menapii were situated between the Scheldt and the Rhine.DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. III.
33 auxilia ex Britannia] cf. IV. 20 omnibus fere Gallicis bellis hostibus nostris inde (from Britain) sumministrata auxilia intellegebat.
Chap. 10.
p. 6.	3 iniuriae retmtorum equitum] ‘the wrongs done by the retention
of the Roman knights7.
datis obsidibus] concessive abl. abs. ‘though they had given hostages’.
ne] one of the many considerations that influenced him was the fear lest (ne) etc.
hoc parte neglecta] ‘if he were to neglect this quarter’.
mobilitet celeriterque] ‘under the influence of a hasty impulse*.
Chap. 11.
12 Treveros] a powerful Keltic people who occupied a large district on both sides of the Mosel, extending as far as the Rhine. They affected a Germanic origin and bore a strong resemblance to the Germans in character and customs. The province of Trier and the town of Treves still preserve their name.
Remos] the departments of Marne and Ardennes correspond roughly to
the territory occupied by the Remi. Their chief oppidum was Durocor- torum, afterwards called Remi, now Rheims.
Belgas] cf. I. 1 with notes. According to Strabo there were 15 Belgic tribe6; the list is made out by Desjardins II. 4 § 3.
cohortibus legionariis] cohorts of the legions, not auxiliary cohorts cohortes sociorum.
Venellos]	the Venelli, or perhaps Unelli, occupied the department of
Somme, the Curiosolitae the department of Cdtes du Nord. Cf. note on 11. 34.
Pictonibus] the Pictones have given their name to the province of Poitou and the town of Poitiers, and the Santones to the province of Saintonge and the town of Saintes formerly Mediolanum. Caesar had not previously specified any particular tribes as being required to furnish ships, cf. 9 naves longas aedificari in flumine Ligere iubet.
pedestribus copiis] notice the omission of cum and contrast cum cohortibus legionariis duodecim proficisci iubet. The preposition could not have been omitted if copiis had stood by itself without pedestribus, the rule being that cum is used with expressions denoting an armed force unless an attribute be added and sometimes when an attribute is added. It is used too when a particular number of troops etc. is specified. Roby § 1235, Draeg. 1 § 225. 2.
Chap. 12.
lingulis] perhaps the only passage in which the word is used in the sense of a * tongue ’ of land : the meaning is more clearly defined by the addition of promunturiis. Kampen suggests that the tongue of land occupied by the fortress of Port Louis opposite Lorient may have been the site of one of these oppida.29	bis...spatio] the mss all have xn for which on first thoughts
one would expect XXiv, and so Kraner reads; but I believe that Heller has satisfactorily defended the vulgate. He says that Caesar is referring to the flow of the tide which continues for 6 hours, after which the ebb prevails for another 6 hours and then the flood-tide recommences : thus Caesar is correct in saying that in the space of 12 hours the flow of the tide (aestus se ex alto incitans) is twice in progress: e.g. supposing it to be low water at 12 noon it will be high water about 6 p. m., low water again shortly after midnight; then at, say, 4 p. m. the tide will be flowing and it will again be flowing at 1 or 2 a. m.; that is, it will be twice flowing within the space of 12 hours. Caesar thus emphasises the shortness of time within which his operations had to be carried on, the enemies’ strongholds being inaccessible except at low water and the ships being unable to navigate the shallow seas except at high water. Had Caesar written xxiv he would, as Heller says, have been giving his readers a piece of information which they must all have learnt at school, cf. Heller in Philologus xxxi p. 532 sqq.
utraque re] ‘on both accounts’, i.e. from the difficulty of attacking whether by land or by sea
magnitudine operis] ‘by the vastness of his works’: this is further explained by the following extruso etc., ‘as he expelled the sea by means of a dam and moles and raised them to a level with the walls of the town’. The following explanation of these works is given by Napoleon after Goler. “The Romans constructed at low water on the firm soil (of the promontory at the end of which the town was situated) two parallel moles serving at the same time as terraces and leading up to the town. During the course of their construction, the space comprised between these two moles was flooded at high water; but as soon as they succeeded in attaching these to the town, this space, into which the water could no longer penetrate, remained henceforward dry and offered to the besiegers a kind of parade-ground, from which to attack”. When the Romans had thus completed these preparations for attacking the town by land the enemy brought up their ships on the seaward side and removed themselves and their effects to another stronghold.
p% 7*	2	facultatem]	cf. 9 neque ullam facultatem habere navium.
Chap. 13.
excipere] ‘to cope with’.
robore] oak.
quamvis] ‘any degree of force and violence*, contumelia is properly contemptuous insolence displayed in manner or words, thence insolent action, or insolence inflicted by one person on another, as in Tac. Hist. III. 85 os offerre contumeliis where it is almost equivalent to ‘blows’. Then by an extension of usage it comes to be occasionally employed of the violence exerted by inanimate objects or natural forces as here by the sea.
transtra] thwarts, cross-benches: it appears from the next chapter that
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIADE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. III.
the Gallic ships were not usually propelled by oars; one must not however assume with Kraner that no provision was made for rowers in case of need.
pedalibus in altitudinem trabibus] ‘consisting of beams a foot in thickness \
digiti pollicis] pollex is not connected with polleo as the Lexicons assert but with porricio (for the change of r to / cf. polliceor to hold out, by way of promise): pollex then means ‘the outstretched’, ‘the pointer’. digitus and 86.ktv\os are probably connected with &xo/uu from the root Sck, and the word therefore means ‘the holder’, ‘receiver’, as the German Finger is connected with fangen ‘to seize'. The word pollex would be sufficient by itself without digitus.
alutae] skins prepared with alum {alumen),
hae]—et hae quidem or atque hae (as in v. 15): ‘and these (were used), either because of the dearth’ etc.
•27	adigebatur] I write this for adiciebatur in obedience to Madvig, so
14 tela adigi: cf. IV. 23 note.
copulis~\ ‘grappling-irons*.
et se vento dedisseni\ see appendix.
Chap. 14.
p* 8. 4 paratissimae atque...ornatissimae"] ‘thoroughly equipped and furnished with every kind of warlike appliance ’.
5 portu] probably the mouth of the river Auray.
cognoverant] ‘they had (previously) ascertained’, ‘they had learnt by previous experience’. Cf. v. 8 contendit ut earn partem insulae caperet qua optimum esse egressum superiore aestate cognoverat.
turribus excitatis] ‘though they erected towers’: excitare is often used in this sense, perhaps with an implied notion of hasty erection, in which case it would correspond to our expression ‘to run up’: cf. v. 40 turres excitantur incredibili celeritate; B. C. I. 25 turres excitabat: in the same chapter we are told that Pompey constructed similar towers on his ships, ibi (i.e. on board his vessels) turres cum ternis tabulatis erigebat easque multis tormentis et omni genere telorum completas ad opera Caesaris appellabat.
ta?nen] ‘nevertheless’, following the concessive ablative absolute turribus excitatis.
has] for the form of the sentence (instead of turres excitatas altitudo ...superabat) Kraner compares IV. 21 quibus auditis ...eos domum remittit, v. 4principibus convocatis hos...conciliavit and elsewhere.
ex barbaris navibus] ‘ from the quarter of’, ‘ in the direction of the barbarian ships’. Caesar apparently uses this phrase instead of the simpler ba?'bararu??i navium (‘the height of the prows of the barbarian ships’; which is what he really meant) in order to avoid the ambiguous double genitive puppium barbararum 7iavium.
neque...et] so often in Greek o0re...re.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIF<gravius acciderent] ‘fell with greater weight’: cf. 25 tela non frustra acciderent; Liv. II. 50 tela ab omniparte accidebant,
magno usui res\ *a thing of great utility’, predicative dative.
praeacutae] sharpened at the end or edge: for the murales falces cf. vii. 22 note.
absimili] “absimilis only here in Caesar, and otherwise chiefly used by late writers; usually in connection with a negative ”. Kraner.
antemnas] ‘sailyards’.
cum...comprehensi.,.erant] ‘whenever the ropes...had been caught and drawn tight*, cum with the plup. indie is used of repeated action.
colies] Napoleon thinks that Caesar was encamped on the heights of
Saint Gildas near Sarzeau overlooking the Bay of Quiberon.
Chap. 15.
26 cum... circumsteterant] * whenever a single ship was surrounded by two or three’. I do not agree with the remark of Thomann quoted and approved by Kampen that the Roman ships must have been more numerous than those of the enemy. Caesar does not say that every Gallic ship was surrounded by two or three of the Roman galleys.
ei ret] the carrying of their ships by boarding.
malacia] ftaXaida which however is not used in this sense of a ‘calm’ at sea. Seneca Ep. 67. 40 draws a distinction between the words here united by Caesar : in otio inconcusso iacere non est tranquillitas, malacia est ‘to lie sunk in undisturbed leisure is not rest, it is effeminacy’.
p. 9* 4 ab hora fere quanta] about 10 or 11 a.m.
Chap. 16,
cum] followed by /«;;z=both ..and.
gravioris] ‘more experienced’.
navium quod ubique fuerat] ‘ all the ships that were anywhere to be found’: for the idiom cf IV. 22 quod navium longarum habebat ‘all the ships of war that he had ’.
10 neque...habebant] ‘they had no place*. There is a slight zeugma here: with the first clause, quo se reciperent, habere retains its literal meaning of ‘to have*; ‘they had no place to which to betake themselves’: with the second clause quemadmodum oppida defenderent, it may be translated by ‘to know’, as £xw frequently in Greek, ‘they did not know how to defend their towns’.
14 senaiu] here as elsewhere Caesar applies Roman terms to foreign institutions. He means the Gallic chiefs or elders.
sub corona] it was an old custom for slaves sold by auction to wear a garland. We are also told that slaves whom the seller would not guarantee wore a pilleus or felt cap.DE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. III.
Chap. 17.
Sabinus] cf. ii where we learn that his force consisted of three
legions.
sununam imperii] ‘the chief command’, followed by the genitive civitatum.
2i Aulerci Eburovices'] one of the three branches of the Aulerci, the other two being the Aulerci Diablintes in western Maine and the Cenomani in eastern Maine. The Aulerci Eburovices lived in the neighbourhood of Evreux which derives its name from them. senatu] see note on last chapter.
loco] Napoleon places the camp of Sabinus on a hill called le Petit- Celland situated about 7 kilometres east of Avranches, between the road from Avranches to Mortain and the little river See. On this hill there are vestiges of a camp of later date called le camp du Chastellier. From the summit to the bank of the See there is a gentle slope of 1500 metres which answers to the distance of 1000 passus given by Caesar in 19.
castris] dative after idoneo, omnibus rebus ‘in every respect’.
duum milium spatio consedisset] according to Napoleon on the north side of the See. There is much doubt however about the locality of this battle. Caesar makes no mention of any stream.
opinionem timoris] ‘belief in his fear’; so in 24, v. 57*
p. 10.	3	legato]	‘	did	not	think that a lieutenant ought to fight ’.
Chap. 18.
6 praemiis pollicitationibusque] a favourite phrase with Caesar, cf. infra 26, B. C. I. 56.
properfuga] ‘in the guise of a deserter’.
10 neque longius abesse quin] ‘and that there is every chance of’.
superiorum dierum Sabini cunctatio] ‘ the hesitation of Sabinus during the last few days’. For the double genitive, cf. I. 19 sine eius offensione animi; 11. 17 eorum dierum consuetudine itineris. The double genitive in 17 summam imperii civitatum is not quite similar.
et quod] ‘ and the usual readiness of men to believe what they wish for ’.
prmsquam sit] for the subjunctive with priusquam cf. Dr Reid’s note on Cic. p. Corn. Balbo § 18.
2i ut explorata victoria] ‘ as though the victory were already assured’.
Ciiap. 19.
24	circiter passus mille] see note on 17.
p.ll. 6 animus...mens] animus ‘spirit’, while mens rather denotes the general disposition or state of mind. The two words are frequently





































DE BELLO GALLICO.	|Comm. III.
over 60, was treacherously murdered, Liv. Epit. 106. Cf. Ovid Fast. VI. 465 Crassus ad Euphraten aquilas natumque suosque \ perdidit et leto est ultimus ipse datus.
vertere] perhaps verterunt should be read with some MSS, as Caesar seldom uses the forms in -re.
oppidum] Sos.
p. 12.	2	cuniculis\ a similar device was employed by the besieged Gauls
at Avaricum (Bourges), vii. 22 aggerem cuniculis subtrahebant eo scientius quod apud eos magnae sunt ferrariae atque omne genus cuniculorum notum atque usitatu??i est.
4 aerariae secturaeque] aerariae ‘copper mines’, secturae ‘cuttings’, ‘diggings', ‘mines & ciel ouvert’, Desjardins, who thinks that Caesar is alluding to iron mines which are known to have been worked in Gaul chiefly by the Bituriges, see the quotation in the last note. The Veneti too seem to have had iron works, cf. supra 13 ancorae pro fmiibus ferreis catenis revinctae.
Chap. 22.
in ea re...intentis'] in 26 Caesar writes omnium oculis mentibusque ad pugnam intentis; intendere may also be followed by in with accusative.
Adiatunnus] M. Desjardins remarks that the Gallic name of this king seems to authorise the conjecture that the Sontiates were a people dwelling on the borders of two ethnographically distinct groups, viz. the Ibero-Aquitanians and the Gauls: 11. 644 n. 4. The name should perhaps be spelt Adiantumnus.
soldurios] Nicolaus of Damascus quoted by Athenaeus vi. 54 says
that these men KaXelodai inro TclXclt&v 777 varpicp yXdrrTr) criXodovpovs, tovto 8’ larlv 'EMt}vl(ttI evxuXificuoi. Nicolaus flourished shortly before the Christian era. It is not clear whether he derives his intormation from any other source besides Caesar’s commentary, or whether he is merely expanding Caesar’s account. From Caesar’s description alone one could scarcely tell whether the 600 were severally bound by ties of loyalty and affection to their king, and lived and died with him, or whether they consisted of pairs of devoted friends owning a general allegiance to the king, in which case one might compare them to the sacred band of Thebes. The authority of Nicolaus, whatever it may be worth, and general probability pronounce for the former view. Plutarch Sertorius 14 mentions a similar custom as prevailing among the Iberians to which he gives the name of kcltclottcictis.
13 sibi mortem consciscant] the usual phrase for suicide.
15	quisquam] placed emphatically at the end of the clause.
r6 cum his] these words are really unnecessary as Caesar had already written cum sexcentis devotis, but they are added by way of picking up the thread of the sentence which had been interrupted by the long parenthesis-
Original from UNIVERSITY^ CALIFORNIACapp. 2i—24]	notes,	$9
Chap. 23.
21 Vocatium et Tarusatium] we have no means of ascertaining the exact position of these tribes. Desjardins suggests that the Vocates may be identified with the tivitas Vasatica of the ‘Notitia Provinciarum’, and with the Vassei of Pliny who also mentions among the Aquitanian communities a tribe of Basaboiates or Basabocates, the latter part of whose name suggests the Vocates of Caesar. The Vasates appear to have left their name in Bazas a town in the department of Gironde. The Tarusates are doubtfully identified by Desjardins with the Toruates of Pliny with the suggestion that they may be the same as the Aturenses of the Notitia, whose name survives in Adura (Aire) on the Adour in the department of Landes It will be noticed that supposing this identification to be correct the Vocates and Tarusates lie to the N. and S. respectively of the Sotiates (Sos), a view scarcely supported by Caesar’s way of speaking of them.
23 natura\ cf. v. 57 et loci natura et manu munitissimis castris.
paucis diebus quibus] ‘ a few days after he had arrived there ’: for the construction, cf. IV. 18 diebus decem quibus materia coepta erat comportari exercitus traducitur; V. 26 diebus circiter quindecim quibus in hiberna ventum est initium tumultus ortum est.
coniurare] ‘to take the military oath’, cf. VII. 1.
civitates] such as the Ilergetes, Vascones, Vaduli, etc.
omnes annos] for the whole period of his campaign; the Sertorian war lasted from 82 to 72 b.c.
loca capere] * to choose positions ’ for encampment.
p. 13. 5 non cunctandum quin\ cf. II. 2 dubitandum non existimavit quin proficisceretur. See Dr Reid’s note on Cic. de Senect. 16.
Chap. 24.
duplici acie] Crassus drew up his force in two lines instead of in the usual acies triplex. The auxiliaries which were usually posted on the wings he stationed in the centre of the line, having no great confidence in them, as is stated in 25.
13	obsessis...poliri] commeatu intercluso expresses the means by which
they hoped to gain the victory, while obsessis viis expresses the means by which they would cut off the supplies: thus the two ablatives are not co-ordinate. ‘They thought it the safer plan to block the roads and so by cutting off their supplies to gain a victory without any bloodshed’.
23 ad hostium casira] Napoleon remarks that this is the only occasion during the whole campaign on which the Romans attacked a fortified Gallic encampment.
Digitized by Googlejo	IDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. III.
Chap. 25.
ad aggerem] 'for the purpose of making an agger’. The Romans found it necessary to construct a sloping mound leading up to the high earthworks of the Gauls.
speciem...praeberent] ‘looked like combatants and were believed to be so’.
50 acciderent] the same word is used of falling weapons in 14.
ab decumana porta] ‘on the side of the porta decumana'', so a dextra ‘on the right hand.’ The enemy must have constructed their entrenched camp on the same principle as the Romans, with two cross- ways intersecting, each terminated at either end by a gateway.
Chap. 26.
p. 14. 3 intritae] besides this passage the word is only quoted from Columella where it is used literally in the sense of ‘not rubbed’.
5	ad pugnam intentis] cf. on 22 in ea re intentus.
8 videri] supply possent from the following posset; cf. supra 3 where the impersonal posset has to be supplied with subsidio veniri for the following possent: ‘before they could be clearly seen by them (the enemy) or it could be known what was going on’. Of course it would be possible to take posset with videri as well as with cognosci, ‘before it could be clearly seen or known’, etc.; but the other way is preferable.
accidere] here used not of a misfortune, but of an unexpected or unforeseen occurrence.
impugnare] this word is less often used in its literal than in its metaphorical or derived sense (impugnare sententiam, etc.); still less frequently is it used without an object, as here.
15 Cantabris] the Cantabri were a powerful tribe on the N. coast of Spain and from them the bay of Biscay received the name of mare Cantabricum. The bellicosus Cantaber gave the Romans some trouble in the time of Augustus and was with difficulty subdued, cf. Hor. Od. I. 6 Cantabrum indoctum iuga ferre nostra and III. 8 servit Hispanae vetus hostis orae | Cantaber sera domitus catena.
Chap. 27.
Tarbelli] this tribe occupied the western portion of the departments
of Landes and Basses Pyrenees. Pliny calls them Tarbelli quatuor- signani which means that their land was occupied by 4 centuriae. Strabo says that they possessed gold mines. Their chief centre was aquae Tarbellicae (Dax). The Cocosates (.sexsignani, Pliny) mentioned below were probably a small tribe dependent on the Tarbelli occupying the district near Castets in Landes.
Bigerriones] their limits correspond roughly to the department of Hautes Pyrdndes, with chief town Bigorra, now perhaps Cieutat.
igitized by GoogleCapp. 25—29J
About 14 miles S.E. of Tarbes there is a town called Bagneres de Bigorre, one of the most fashionable of the watering-places of the Pyrenees.
Ptianii] of this tribe nothing whatever is known; even the name is uncertain.
Elusates] they occupied the district of Elusa now Eauze. In the ‘Notitia Provinciarum’ Elusa is called the civiias metropolis of the Novempopulana of Aquitania.
Gates] nothing whatever is known of this people.
Ausct] occupied the central or southern part of the department of Gers. They gave their name to Auch.
Garumni] not elsewhere mentioned; one may conclude that they bordered on the Garonne.
Sibuzates'] this tribe may have given its name to Saubusse on the Adour.
hoc facere neglexerunt] Caesar might have omitted hoc facere, as in iv 38 eo duae omnino civitates ex Britannia obsides miserunt, reliquae neglexerunt.
Chap. 28.
25 qui in armis essent] notice essent not erant; the qui is causal.
30 silvas ac paludes] cf. vi. 5 erant Menapii propinqui Eburonum finibus perpetuis paludibus silvisque mu?iiti.
Chap. 29.
p. 15. 6 inermibus i??iprude?itibusque] ‘while unarmed and off their guard’. This is an abl. abs., the dative not being found after impetum facere (Kraner).
14 sub pellibus] ‘under canvas’. The Roman tabernacula or tentoria were usually made of skins, tentoriae pelles.
Aulercis] no doubt the Aulerci Eburovices of whom mention has been made before.
proxime] ‘lately’; see appendix.