Galliam in libertatem vindicent]4 assert the freedom of Gaul \ vind. in lib. 4to claim for freedom’ is a legal phrase; cf. VIII. 39 sc vindicarent in libertatem.
eorum clandestina consilia] eorum shows that the words priusquam., efferantur are Caesar’s own and not to be considered as a part of what the Gauls said, for in that case sua would have been used to represent nostra, Cf. R. § 2268 b.
19 legiones] there were now 10 legions in Gaul—a on the confines of the Treveri, 2 among the Lingones and 6 at Agedincum (Sens) in the territory of the Senones, VI. 44. The numbers of these legions were I. VII. VIII. IX. X. XI. XII. XIII. XIV. XV.
p. 2. 2 praestare interfici quam non recuperare] for a different construction, cf 17, note, acceperint = accepimus in oratio recta.
Chap. 2.
4 Carnutes'] a tribe dwelling between the Cenomani and the Senones. Their chief town Cenabum (afterwards called civitas Aure- lianorum) on the Liger (Loire) is the modern Orleans. The mss in this passage all write Genabum, but Desjardins (11. 477 note) has shown conclusively that the name begins with C: cf. Strabo’s	ov. M.
d’Arbois de Jubainville maintains that Caenabum would be a more correct spelling, which derives some confirmation from the variations of the mss of viii. 5, 6. In VI. 13 Caesar says that the Druids met annually for the administration of justice in the territory of the Carnutes which was considered the centre of Gaul.
6	et quoniam] 4and since they are unable at present to give the mutual
security of hostages, lest the affair should be made public, they demand the assurance of an oath and pledge, by joining the military standards (wherein, by their custom, is involved a most solemn ceremony), that they shall not be abandoned by the rest as soon as the war begins’. quo should probably be taken by itself = 4 whereby’ and more cowm together, cf. n. on quo timore 26: K. is inclined to join quo more and take eorum with caerimonia. The words 7te res efferatur give the reason why they cannot give hostages; ut sanciatur depends on petunt; nefacto, etc. gives the object for which the pledge is required.
obsidibus cavere] lit. 4to give security by hostages’: cf. obsidibus firmat viii. 48. In this clause possint is used, not possunt, because the verb is suboblique, i.e. subordinate to oratio obliqua: for a clear explanation of this cf. Kenn. § 190.
Chap. 3.
ea dies] dies is masc. when it is used literally of an actual day of 24 hours; fern, when it is used as here, in the more general sense of time, limit or date. The distinction may be clearly seen in I. 6 diem dicunt qua die ad ripam Rhodani omnes conveniant: is dies erat a. d. V, Kal. Apr.
14 civesque Rom. qui negotiandi causa ibi constiterant] these persons were called negotiatores. They traded in corn and to this occupation
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAadded the profession of money-lender: in this latter capacity they corresponded to the argentarii and feneratores at Rome. As the next line shows, they were sometimes Roman equites, honestum * respectable ’. K. quotes Cic. p. Font. 11 referta Gallia negotiatorum est, plena civium Romanorum. nemo Gallorum sine cive Romano quicquam negotii gerit: numus in Gallia nullus sine civium Romanorum tabulis commovetur. This was spoken B.c. 69.
20 clamore] Caesar probably means that men were posted at regular intervals to transmit the news by shouting from Cenabum to Gergovia. Nap. 11. 241 note says that a somewhat similar system prevailed in Auvergne in the middle ages ; a chain of towers, about 400 or 500 yards apart, was built; on these watchmen were stationed who transmitted the news by sonorous monosyllables or, in case of adverse winds, by beacon fires. For hunc all the best mss read hanc.
per agros regioncsque\ agri denotes ‘country’ as opposed to ‘town’: regiones, greater or less extents or tracts of country. Cf. 13 agri fertilissima regione.
ut tum accidit] ‘ as it happened on this	particular occasion’.
quae gesta essent]	the relative clause	contains a concession	and
the mood is therefore subjunctive, cf. Kenn. § 204. ‘The subjunctive expresses a real action viewed as the attendant circumstance notwithstanding which another action takes place’ R. § 1712. Caesar thereby implies the strangeness of the fact that though these events took place early in the morning at Cenabum, yet they were known by the Arvemi the same day. The	night from sunset	to sunrise was divided	into
vigiliae of varying	length according to	the season of the year;	the
news probably reached the Arverni about 8 p.m.
Arvernorum] the Arvemi were at one time the most powerful tribe in Gaul after the Aedui, cf. 1. 31. They gave their name to the modem Auvergne. At the time of Caesar’s arrival (58 B.C.) the Sequani who were clietttes of the Arvemi were disputing the supremacy of Gaul with the Aedui, vi. 12.
Chap. 4.
26 principatum Galliae totius obtinuerat\ the same phrase is used of the supremacy of the Sequani, vi. 12. By tota Gallia Caesar must mean central and southern Gaul. For an account of these canton- leagues, cf. Momms. iv. 226, foil
incendit]	the object of the verb {eos) must be supplied from the
preceding abl. abs., cf. R. § 1247, Kenn. § 238. The clientes were originally freemen who from the pressure of debt or from other circumstances had surrendered themselves into slavery to the chieftains or nobles (principes). They thus corresponded more or less closely to the theows or thralls of early English history, cf. Bright, Public School English History, I. 29. Besides these the principes had large bodies of retainers called ambacti, VI. 15. The Helvetic Orgetorix could summon on an emergency 10,000 retainers besides clients and debtors, 1. 4.
2
Digitized by GOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
32 ex oppido Gergovia] the hill on which Gergovia was situated is between 3 and 4 miles S. of Clermont in the department of Puy de Dome. Gergovia is called an urbs 36. * Oppida were for the most part entrenched fortresses on lofty eminences or in woody coverts whither a whole tribe might retreat in case of attack with all its moveables and cattle.* Meriv. 1. 228 and note.
non destitit tamen atque habet] notice the positive clause habet connected by atque with the negative clause non destitit. We should say, * he did not however desist but holds a levy, etc. ’
p. 3. 5 quoqueversus] this, not quoquoversus, is the right spelling as N. shows.
6 Senones, etc.] these tribes (omitting the Aulerci) have left traces of their names in the towns of Sens, Paris, Poitiers (province Poitou), Cahors and Quercy, Tours (province Touraine), Limoges (province Limousin), Angers sur Mayenne (province Anjou). Of the Aulerci there were 4 divisions, the Aul. Brannovices (Briennois), Diablintes, Cenomani, Eburovices (chief town Evreux).
civitatibus obsides imperat] ‘orders the states to furnish hostages’, the construction being imperare alicui aliquem (or aliquid).
armorum quantum] lit. ‘he fixes the amount of arms which each state should furnish at home and by what time* (»quodque ante tempus).
15 omnibus tormentis] cf. note on 1 omnibus pollicitationibus.
17 ut sint reliquis documento] * that they may be for an example to the rest*, documento is an instance of the predicative dative, so called because it predicates or declares something regarding the action or state of the subject, e.g. non erit auxilio nobis Aetolus (Verg.), ‘the Aetolian will not be for an aid to us’. This dative is fully discussed in Roby, pref. Vol. 11, pp. xxv—lvi. The following instances occur in this book : subsidio mittunt 8, usui sint 11, praesidio et ornamento sit 15, subsidio veniri 36, praesidio relinquit 40, magno usui fuisse 41, praesidio reliquerat 49, saluti fuit 50, ne quo esset usui 55, esset praesidio 57, praesidio relinquit 60, praesidio relicti and subsidio ierunt 62, terrori futurum 66, praesidio relictis 68, auxilio succurrerent 80, auxilio sum- mit teba fit 81, subsidio mittit 86, subsidio adducit 87.
Chap. 5.
Lucterium] Voss thinks that this name reappears in more recent times in the form of Luther.
Rutenos] the Ruteni occupied a tract of country north of the river Tarn, corresponding more or less to the department of Aveyron. Their chief town was Segodunum now Rhodez on the river Aveyron. Part of their territory fell within the boundaries of the Roman province; cf. 7 where Caesar speaks of the Ruteni provinciales.
Bituriges] there were two divisions of this people, (i) the Bituriges Vibisci whose chief town Burdigala is the modern Bourdeaux, (ii) the
Original fn
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIABit. Cubi whose name still survives in the province of Berry and the tovrn of Bourges. Caesar is here speaking of the Bit. Cubi.
22 Aeduos] the Aedui (or Haedui) were allies of the Romans I. n and had often been styled *fratres ’ by the Roman Senate I. 33, cf. Heit- land and Haskins on Lucan Phars. I. 427. They were situated between the Liger and the Arar. From the words quorum erant in fide ‘in whose allegiance they were’ we may suppose that the Bituriges were tributaries (stipendiarii) of the Aedui and bound to render military service: the same phrase is used VI. 4 of the relation of the Senones to the Aedui; so in the same chapter the Carnutes are said to stand in the relation of clients, in clientela, to the Remi.
25	subsidio]	cf. note on 4 documento.	Add this to Roby’s instances of
subsidio mittere Vol. II. pref. p. liii.
revertisse] the perfect reverti is always used by the best Latin waiters; but Cicero and Caesar (B. C. vi. 42) use the participle reversus. The perfect reversus sum is once used by Tacitus Ann. XII. 21 where there is an obvious reason for its employment. In the present tense the deponent form is almost always used.
id consilii] the genitive of ‘divided whole,’ R. § 1296.
quam legatis pronuntiarunt] ‘a short relative clause, especially when it immediately follows a demonstrative, is often constructed independently of oratio obliqua, being regarded as a mere epithet: eloquendi vis ejficil ut ea quae ignoramus discere et ea quae scimus alios docere possimus. Cic. N. D. II. 59.* K.enn. § 193. This rule accounts for the indicative pronuntiarunt.
tro cer*° fsse Ponendum] the phrase pro certo ponere occurs Liv. X. 9. Most mss here have by mistake proponendum which K. retains.
Chap. 6.
p. 4. 3 his rebus in Italiam Caesari nuntiatis] if the nom. Caesar be read with some mss cf. for the position of the word, 1 indictis inter se principes Galliae conciliis: if the dative be read, cf. for the form of the sentence, which is not in Caesar’s usual style, the beginning of I. 7.
virtute]	energy, decisive action. Virtus ‘manliness’ the distinctive
quality of a vir {appellata est ex viro virtus Cic.) may imply any or all of the ‘cardinal virtues’. Contrast with this the narrower use of the Greek avdpeia of like derivation.
Cn. Pompei\ Pompey assumed the Consulship 25 Feb. which, on account of the confusion of the Roman calendar at the time, corresponded to the middle of January, Meriv. 11. 45 note.
6 mapia difficultate] ‘he felt great perplexity as to the best means of joining his army’.
8 provinciam\ the province of Gallia Narbonensis: it was usually called simply provincia.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
arcesseref] one ms has acceiseret. Mr A. S. Wilkins in Journal of Philology, Vol. VI. n. 12, comes to the conclusion that there are two verbs arcesso and accerso of different origin, though from their similarity of form and meaning they are liable to constant confusion.
Chap. 7.
Nitiobroges] A tribe N. of the Garumna, W. of the Cadurci. Their chief town was Aginnum now Agen.
Gabalos] N.E. of the Ruteni in the department of Loz£re.
Narbonem] the colony of Narbo Martius (Narbonne) was founded by L. Licinius Crassus B.c. 118. Cic. p. Font. 13 calls it specula populi Romani ac propugnaculum. The acc. Narbonem follows the verb of motion contendit, and is not governed by versus which is an adverb.
omnibus consiliis antevertendum] lit. 'thought it to be preferred to ail plans that he should go to Narbo*, i.e. he thought it would be wiser to go to Narbo than to follow any other plan that suggested itself. Cf. a somewhat similar use of praeverto C. Div. I. 10 si vacas animo neque habes aliquid quod huic sermoni praevertendum putes.
Volcis Arecomicis] a tribe in the neighbourhood of Nemausus (Nismes); the Volcae Tectosages dwelt S.E. of these; their chief town was Toloso (Toulouse) whose inhabitants are called Tolosates.
20 supplementum] the troops that Caesar had levied in Gallia Cisalpina. They did not form a fresh legion.
72 convenire in Helvios\ notice convenire followed by in with acc. = to go to the Helvii and assemble there. The Helvii were within the Roman province; their chief town Alba Augusta is now called Alps or Aps.
Chap. 8.
represso] 'checked*. Lucterius is the subject of putabat, Caesar of proficiscitur.
Cevennd] the Cevenncs. K. inserts mons before Cevenna with two inferior mss thinking it necessary as the mountain is now mentioned for the first time and its situation explained.
durissimo tempore] abl. of attendant circumstances or ablative absolute R. § 1140; used here in a slightly causal sense 'since it was the most rigorous season of the year ’.
discussa] ‘having cleared away the snow which was 6 feet in depth*. pedum is the gen. of description or quality after nive, the order being nive sex pedum in alt. ‘snow of 6 feet in depth*. Cf. 73 scrobes trium in altitudinem pedum. The sense of the passage is apparently mistaken by G. and also by the translator in Bohn.
summo militum rudore] not labore which L. retains. Caesar might have written cum summo etc., cf. Kenn. § 151, R. § 1235.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIACapp. 6—9]	NOTES.	55
18 quibus oppressis inopinantibus] ‘and when he had come upon them unawares*. The union of participles should be noticed, the second being used adverbially, inopinantes opprimuntur occurs 61.
30	singulari] ‘single*. Cf. Cic. de leg. agr. II. 97.
33 celeriter haec fama ac nuntii ad Vercingetorigem perferuntur] this is the reading of the best mss. 'haec fama ac nuntii—haec fama et hi nuntii and that in the sense of huius rei fama et huius rei nuntii’ K. N, L, F read nuntiis after a late edition of 1508; in which case tr. ‘this intelligence (haec) is carried to V. by report (fama) and by messengers’. Possibly perferunt should be read with 3 mss in which case haec would be neut. acc. pi.
p. 5.	*2	neu	se	ab hostibus diripi patiatur] the best MSS have neu ab
hostibus diripiantur which H. declares to be inadmissible. [It is however allowed by Nipperdey on Tac. Ann. 11. 58 who also reads neu mortem in iisdem laboribus obirent (=obirepateretur) in Ann. I. 35, but Heller’s reasoning (Phil. xix. 493 foil.) is, I think, conclusive.]
in Arvernos versus] Forcellini qu. Sulp. ad Cic. Ep. ad Fam. IV. 12 in Italiam versus navigaturus erat, Vel. I. 15 in palatium versus, Lex Repetundarum in forum versus. The word is more often found with ad, cf. Sail. Cat. 56 where both ad and in occur, modo ad urbem modo in Galliam versus.
Chap. 9.
usu ventura] usu venire, ‘to come in practice’ = * to happen*. Cf. R. § 1238. Caesar had forecalculated (opinione praeceperat) that this would happen about (with reference to) Vercingetorix.
per causam] always used in Caesar, says K., of a pretended reason. Caesar’s real object was to join his legions. The need of a fresh levy served him as a plausible excuse for leaving the army.
exercitu] this army consisted of some of the provincial troops and the supplementum levied in Italy, cf. 7 end. To this the words A is copiis in the next clause seem to refer.
Brutum] Decimus Brutus. He was afterwards one of those who conspired against Caesar’s life.
Vienjtam] a town on the Rhone, a few miles S. of Lyons, now Vienne.
nandus recentem equitatum] ‘having found the cavalry refreshed’ K.
Lingones] a tribe situated N.E. of the Aedui. Their chief town An- dematunnum afterwards called Lingones is the modern Langres in the department of Haute Marne.
de sua salute] about his (Caesar’s) safety, etiam should be taken closely with ab Aeduis.
18 reliquas legiones] cf. n. on 1 legiones.
in unum locum] it is not clear whether this means some town in the district of the Ligones or Agedincum itself w'here six legions had been56	DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
left in winter quarters and where, as we afterwards learn, two legions were now left with all the baggage.
priusquam posset] the historical present cogit is virtually equivalent to a past tense, hence the imperfect posset. For the subj. mood after prius- quam cf. my note on iv. 4 and R. § 1672 with § 1671. The example there quoted from Sail. Jug. 54 illustrates both the mood and tense of posset.
21	Gorgobinam] Nap. with whom Desjardins is inclined to agree, places
this at St Parize-Ie-Chatel between the Allier and the Loire and near their confluence: G. thinks it is the modern La Guerche on the Aubois in the department of Cher about 10 miles S.W. of Nevers. For the settlement of the Boii in the territory of the Aedui, cf. I. 28 end. They paid tribute to the Aedui, hence they are called in the next chapter stipendiarii Aeduorum.
24 ad consilium] for this use of ad cf. 26 ad insequendum tardabat.
Chap. 10.
si reliquam partem] the reasoning is this: Caesar feared that if he kept his legions for the rest of the winter in one place, Vercingetorix would take Gorgobina by storm, and in that case the whole of Gaul would revolt on seeing that Caesar’s friends could not rely on his protection. difficultas ‘perplexity’ implies ‘fear’, hence the use of ne ‘ lest
26 expugnatis] expugnare * to storm ’ used of the people instead of the place which they occupy is rare in the older prose. K.
ab re frumentaria] ‘in the matter of the corn-supply’, lit. ‘from the side of’. So Cic. Fam. X. 15 Antonius ab equitatu firmus esse dicebatur, ‘A. was said to be strong in cavalry’, duris subvectionibus ‘inconsequence of the difficulties of carriage’: this is, I think, better than to take the abl. with laborare, for which construction cf. Kenn. § 148 2.
p. 6. i Agedinci] at Agedincum, cf. 3 Cenabi ‘at Cenabum’. Latin and Greek had originally a case called the locative to express, as its name shows, the place where a thing happens. As this case always ended in i in the singular, the Romans confounded it with the genitive or dative according to the declension; thus Karthagini in the sense of ‘at Carthage’ is locative not dative: compare Romae (for Romai) ‘at Rome*. In the plural this case ends in is, Athenis ‘at Athens’. Kenn. § 20, p. 83.
Ciiap. 11.
altero die] on the second, i.e. the next day. Vellaunodunum was in the department of Loiret but its exact position is not known. It was probably somewhere in the neighbourhood of Montargis, if not Montargis itself. Napoleon places it at Tregueres a small town situated in a direct line between Sens and Gien, at a distance of 25 miles from the latter place.oppugnare]	the object of oppugnare must be supplied from the be
ginning of the sentence: notice that the second verb circumvallavit has its object expressed (idque). K. well compares B. C. III. 21 eo in Italiam evocato...sibi coniunxit atque eum praemisit.
conficeret] for the tense of this verb and of faceret in the next sentence, cf. n. on 9 posset. K. perhaps rightly joins the clause ipse... jaceret with the previous sentence: so Davies (ed. 1706).
C. Trebonium] one of Caesar’s best and most valued officers. Like Decimus Brutus he afterwards turned traitor,
quod eo mitterenf\ the reading is doubtful. The Camutes had not bethought themselves of defending their own town Cenabum because they expected that Caesar would be occupied for some time with the siege of Vellaunodunum.
diei tempore exclusus] cf. V. 2$ ne anni tempore a navigatione excluderetur.
id posterum'] supply diem from the previous genitive.
usui sint] subjunctive because the relative quae denotes not ‘those things which* but rather ‘such things as’, cf. Cic. Fin. in. 4physici verbis utuntur iis quae ipsi Graeciae nota non sint and Madvig’s note. For usui esse ad, cf. iv. ip, v. 1, ea quae sunt usui ad armandas naves ex Hispania adportart iubet B. C. I. 19. militibus is dat. after imperat.
18 excubare] this word is used indifferently of keeping guard by day or by night; whereas excubiae is usually opposed to vigiliae, excubiae diurnae sunt, vigiliae nocturnae. We sometimes find excubiae for vigiliae but never vice versa.
26 pervenit] of course this word does not mean, as Nap. supposes it does, that Caesar was in the territory of the Bituriges as soon as he had crossed the river.
Chap. 12.
destitit atque proficiscitur] for the change of tense, cf. 4 non destitit atque habet.
Noviodunum] this is identified by G. with Nouan le Fuzdlier a town S. of Orleans in the department of Loire et Cher. Nap. places it at Sancerre on the Loire in the department of Cher. It must be carefully distinguished from the Noviodunum mentioned 55 which was a town in the territory of the Aedui, now Nevers, and from Noviodunum Suessionum II. 12 where see my note. K. follows Madvig Adv. II. 254 in retaining the reading of the inferior mss oppidum Biturigum positum in via.
ut sibi ignosceret] the words ut...consuleret express the substance of their prayer ‘to pray (oratum supine) him to pardon, etc.’: the second ut going with conficeret = ‘in order that he might accomplish*. For the past tense oonficeret after the historic present iubet, cf. n. on 9 posset.
Digitized by Google58	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
33 equos product] in last chapter and elsewhere iumenta produci. Kel- lerbauer in Philologus XXL wants to write iumenta here, but the iambic rhythm would perhaps be an objection to this.
p. 7.	7 murum complere] ‘ man the wall’ i in 27 the phrase is used of a
hostile occupation.
10 omnes incolumes] these words are probably acc., or omnes may be acc., incol. nom. They can scarcely both be nom. as K. thinks.
Chap. 13.
12	laborantibus]	cf. 70 laborantibus nostris Caesar Germanos summittit.
Caesar tells us that he had been in the habit of employing German cavalry ab initio, which would seem to mean from the beginning of his campaigns in Gaul.
atque in fugam] atque— ‘ and so’, cf. atque pervenit 11 end.
perduxerunt] perhaps F. is right in reading produxerunt from two inferior mss.
quibus rebus confectis] Heller asks how it was that Caesar did not take advantage of his partial success, and attack the main body of the Gallic army if as Nap. supposes it was hemmed in between the Romans on the one side and the Loire and the Roman allies, the Aedui, on the other. He agrees with G. that Vercingetorix made a hasty march westward to extricate himself from his dangerous position. In this case he would approach Avaricum from the West and not from the East as he is made to do by Napoleon.
Avaricum] Bourges, situated at the confluence of several small streams, the Auron, Yevre. Yevrette, Moulon, etc.
agri fertilissima regione] ‘ in an extremely fertile tract of country’.
Chap. 14.
23 Vellaunoduni] for the case of this and the two following nouns, cf. n. on Agedinci 10.
aedificiis] the farm-buildings, barns, in which it was stored.
rei familiaris co mmoda] ‘domestic interests’.
a Boia] these words can hardly be correct: the best emendation • that has been proposed is Madvig’s ab viay but even this is not altogether
satisfactory.
p. 8.	4 interesse ipsosne...impcdimcntisne] this form of disjunctive interro
gation (ne...ne) is more common in poetry than in prose. The usual form is utrum...an.
5 quibus amissis bellum geri non possit] the subjunctive possit show's that this is a subordinate sentence, and therefore quibus amissis— cumy iis amissis ‘since, when they are lost’. If quibus amissis had been =r/,
1 is amissis ‘and, when they are lost* the clause would have formed a principal sentence (i. e. not subordinate) and posse would have been
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA

































6o	DE	BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
lican period and the distinction certainly did not exist under the Empire.
necessario] 1 of necessity* not to be taken with longius K. Cf. v 23 necessario angustius, B. C. I. 58 propius necessario, 64 bellum necessario longius duci, 65 necessario maturius, cum with subj. appears to be used here of repeated action = * whenever’. Roby says this usage is rarely if ever found in Cicero, Caesar, Sallust. Cf. § 1716, also §§ 1718, 1720.
p, 9. i *1**1 ‘ although preventive measures were taken by our troops as far as was possible by calculation and foresight, such as going at uncertain times and by various routes ut irelur explanatory of occurrebatur : for ratione cf. Kcnn. §151.
Chap. 17.
4	Caesar]	notice the position of the word Caesar which is the subject
of coepit.
aggerem] the agger was an earthwork or rampart constructed chiefly of earth strengthened by timber and fascines (crates): it was usually made to equal in height the wall of the besieged town. For its construction cf. my note on 22.
vitieas] ‘penthouses’; lightly built frames of wood 8ft. high, 7 ft. broad, 16 ft. long, made of at least 4 uprights with a wooden roof sloping upwards to a central ridge running the length of the structure. The roof and the sides seem to have been covered with wickerwork and outside this were fastened hides or mattresses (centones) to protect it from fire. These penthouses were used to shelter the soldiers from the enemies’ missiles, agere ‘push forward’ ‘advance’. K.
turres] these turres ambulatoriae or mobiles (Liv. XXI. n) were mounted on wheels and moved up the agger, from the top of which they commanded the beleaguered town: for more information about them cf. S.D.A. *turris ’.
loci natura prohibebat] the town being surrounded on ail sides but the S.E. by the Yevrette and the Auron.
alteri] the first alteri refers to the Aedui, the second to the Boii. studio * enthusiasm ’. non magnis facultatibus abl. of attendant circumstances ‘since their resources were but meagre’, cf. durissimo tempore8.
summa difficultate] in this sentence notice 3 different kinds of abl. (i) aff. exerc. abl. abs. (ii) difficultate abl. of matter ‘ troubled with scarcity ’ Kenn. § 148. (iii) tenuitate etc. abl. of cause ‘ in consequence of’ Kenn. § 144.
15 caruerint...sustentarent] the perf. is here used of an event in past time simply regarded as such without reference to its being contemporaneous with or prior to other past events; the imp. denotes the contemporaneous state. If this had been a principal, not a subordinate sentence, Caesar would have written caruerunt...sustentabant.
Caesar cum] we should transpose these words in translation.
igitized by GoogleCapp. 16—19]
72	incepta re] abi. abs. K. and H. read infecta re from inferior MSS.
23	laturos loco] ‘regard in the light of infamy*, si reliquissent is expla
natory of hoc.
26	parentarent] parentare would have been equally good Latin, cf. recu
perare 1, alienare 10: the construction here is as if quamutnon had been written, parentare ‘ to offer a sacrifice in honour of deceased parents’: it is here used of killing the Gauls as an offering to the manes of the murdered Roman citizens. Tr. ‘to avenge*, cf. Liv. xxiv. 21; Ov. Amor. I. 13 3 Memnonis umbrae annua solenni caede parentet avis. For Cenabi cf. n. on Agedinci 10. For the event cf. 3.
Chap. 18.
expeditis] the Gauls borrowed this custom from the Germans I. 48. Each horseman was accompanied into battle by a footsoldier to whose side he returned after the cavalry charge, and by whom, if wounded, he was defended. These footmen were able in case of need to keep pace with the horses by holding on to their manes, cf. VIII. 36 praemittit equitatum omnem Germanosque pedites summae velocitatis homines.
p. 10. 4 in loco edito] probably on the left bank of the Auron opposite the village of St Just. The ground here is said to answer precisely to the description given by Caesar.
5 sarcinas conferri] ‘the baggage to be collected*. In I. 24 Caesar says more precisely sarcinas in unum locum conferri et eum..,muniri iussit.
Chap. 19.
pontibus] raised paths or dams across the marsh like the ponies longi mentioned in Tac. Ann. I. 63.
generatirnque] ‘ distributed according to their several cantons’, cf. 36.
saltus eius paludis] there is some difficulty in these words. K.
proposes to strike out eius paludis as a marginal addition to vada. H. suggests salicta qu. Ovid Met. XI. 363 iunctapalus huic est densis obsessa salictis; Liv. XXV. 17; N. has transitus, Madvig meatus. Hoffmann omnia vada eius paludis ac saltus. May not saltus paludis mean the thickets skirting the marsh? The Greek paraphrast has iracras rds TovTov rod 6povs Kopvtpas i<ppovpovv which points to a totally different reading.
sic animo parati ut] ‘ firmly resolved to’, sic paratus also occurs without animo.
12 propinquitatem] judging merely from the position of the combatants and their nearness to each other one would have thought them evenly matched, but a glance at the nature of the ground showed that the enemy were only making an idle parade of their strength. This or something like it must be the meaning of the passage, but to me it is almost unintelligible.
18	detrimento...morte] ablatives of price after constare,	Kenn. § 147.
)igitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
■20 .«ttz laude] for the sake of his (Caesar’s) renown. So sua salute his own safety.
2i	iniquitatis]	gen. after condemnari cf. Kenn. § 167, cf. proditionis
insimulatus 20.
Chap. 20.
p. 11. i persuasum]^ id sibi persuasum esse.
ipse ut munitione\ so K. for mss ipsum munitione.
neque debuisse...et fuisse] notice neque...et ‘ neither...and*: we must translate ‘not...and’: so in Greek ovtc...tI often occurs.
summam imperii] ‘the chief command’ cf. 57 and elsewhere.
huic] the person who gave the indicium.
remittere] give up, i. e. his imperium.
si sibi 'magis] ‘if they think that they are conferring an honour on him (sibi) rather than receiving safety from him*, videantur ‘seem to themselves’ ‘think’. Cf. v. 51.
in pabulatione] ‘while foraging’. Cf. 24 erant in opere ‘were at work’.
21	si possent1 ‘to see if they could’ Kenn. § 218 2.
se ex fuga recipientem] ‘seeking shelter from flight*, we should say ‘in flight’, ex fuga seems to be used because the fuga is looked upon as an action or state from which recourse is had to shelter. In 11. 12 se ex terrore ac fuga recipere means ‘to recover oneself from’; with the present passage cf. VI. 41 and fuga se recipere I. 11.
recipiat] notice the careless (?) repetition of recipere. Cf. v. 35 locum ...locus and elsewhere.
Chap. 21.
in eo] ‘in the case of him whose speech they approve’. For the fact cf. Tac. Hist. v. 17; Germ. 11. p. 12. i maiore ratione] ‘on a more reasonable method*. Cf. Cic. p. Plancio § 2 magna ratione.
4 penes eos] in the hands of the Bituriges. This, the reading of the MSS, is defended by H. who explains su?nma victoriae as ‘the 11uits of victory*. The Gauls feared that if the Bituriges succeeded, unaided, in holding Avaricum against the Romans, they alone would reap all the advantage of their victory; therefore they determined to send routin' gents from all the Gallic forces {ex omnibus copiis) to the relief of the town. N. and K. have pacne in eo from two late mss ; with this reading tr. ‘because they understood that the very essence of victory consisted almost entirely in the successful defence of that town’, si... retinuissent being explanatory of eo.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGoccurrebant] for a similar use of occurrere in the sense of ‘thwarting* cf. 16 occurrebatur.
ut est genus] ‘being, as they are, a people of remarkable cleverness and extremely able in imitating and producing everything from time to time brought under their notice by others’, a quoque ‘by each person from time to time’.
fakes] Caesar ill. 14 describing the instruments improvised by the Romans for disabling the enemies’ ships says that they were fakes praeacutae insertae ajjixaeque longuriis non absimili forma muralium falcium. The murales fakes were scythe-shaped hooks fixed in the ends of beams (worked by machinery?) and used for loosening or pulling out stones in the walls. These falces the Gauls turned aside by nooses (laqueis), and when they had got them fast (destinaverant) they pulled them inside the walls by means of windlasses (tormentis),
destinaverant] cf. IV. 17 for the word and tense.
aggerem cuniculis subtrahebant] the Gauls undermined the Roman agger and drew away the material of which it was composed. So the besieged Plataeans vt6po/jlop (cuniculum) Ik ttJs irbXeus dpv^apres kcll tTWTeKfjLTjpafiepoi vtto to x<*H& v<pei\KOP vapd a<f>ds Tov x°^v- Thuk. II. 76. (Here is the mound, the material of which it is made.)
scientius] the positive scienter is used by Caesar in B. C. I. 55.
murum turribus contabulaverant] —murum turribus contabulatis in- struxerant (Forcellini), cf. V. 40 turres contabulantur. By totum murum Caesar probably means all that part of the wall which was exposed to the attacks of the Romans.
15 ignem] the agger was inflammable from the quantity of wood used in its construction, cf. 17.
expresserat] ‘had raised’. The Romans increased the height of their agger every day by the addition of fresh material on the side adjoining the enemies’ walls, by which it was at once raised and brought nearer to the besieged town; the heightening of the agger of course raised the moveable turres (cf. 17) which were placed on it. quotidianus agger means the daily addition to the agger.
commissis suarum turrium malis] in a turris consisting of only one or two stories, the four (or more) upright beams constituting its outer framework would doubtless rise to a much greater height than the main body of the structure. If it was necessary to heighten the tower, i. e. to add more stories, these poles were joined (committere) by layers of cross-beams forming additional stories, till, if neediul, the top of the poles was reached. This is the way in which the passage is usually64	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
taken. Ciacconius and Madvig suggest alis for malis ‘by joining the wings (extremis laterum partibus) of the towers by cross-beams’; this would have the effect of raising a fresh wooden barricade on the original wall between each of the several towers, but it may be questioned whether there was any interval at all between the towers, cf. above, totum murum ex omni parte turribus contabulaverant.
apertos cuniculos] these cuniculi must be distinguished from those mentioned above. The Romans constructed their agger stage by stage. They first laid a layer of material of about 6 ft. or so in height and of varying breadth (cf. n. on 24 latum) at right angles to the wall of the besieged town ; in the middle of this and running its entire length they left an open passage (cuniculus): this was then roofed over and on the first layer was laid a second layer or stage of material with a similar cuniculus over the first cuniculus, and so on, till the requisite number of stages, each with its own cuniculus, had raised the agger to its intended height. The cuniculi were used as gangways to protect the soldiers bringing up material for the agger, but they served their main purpose when the end of the agger nearest the town had been brought up as close to the wall as possible; for the besieged by means of firebrands, stones and other missiles could always prevent its being brought into actual contact with their wall: till this ravine-like space between the agger and the wall was filled up the town could not be stormed, and this was now effected by bringing up material through the several cuniculi and shooting it into the aforesaid place. This being filled up the Romans could wheel their moveable turres up the agger and use them against the walls. The cuniculi could also be used for undermining the enemies’ walls. In the present passage we are told that the Gauls threw stones, wood, pitch, etc., against the open ends of the cuniculi (apertos cuniculos) to prevent their being advanced nearer.—The above description is condensed from the elaborate account of the construction of the agger given by Rustow.
Chap. 23.
23 The walls seem to have been constructed thus. A row of balks of timber was laid on the ground at right angles to the line of the intended wall, an interval of two feet separating one balk from another ; then between the two ends of two adjacent balks, on what would be the outside of the wall, was placed a large stone; the rest of the interval between the two balks was filled up with earth and rubble. When every interval between the successive balks had been thus filled up, the lowest layer of the wall had been completed ; it would probably be about a foot high. On this layer was laid a second layer of balks with intervals similarly filled up with rubble inside and large stones towards the outside; only the balks of the second layer were not laid on the balks of the first, but on the intervals between them ; then a third layer was added with its balks over the intervals of the second layer and consequently above the balks of the low est layer ; and so on till the wall had reached the required height. Seen from the outside the wall would give somewhat the appearance of a chess-board, the dark squares representing the ends of the balks and the alternating light squares the
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAlarge stones placed between them. This of course supposes the end of each beam to be of about the same size as the stone filling up the two- foot interval, i. e. to be itself two feet broad; but this is rather doubtful (cf. Mr Long’s note). In this description, for the sake of convenience, one particular has been omitted. When the first layer had been constructed, a long beam of about 40 ft. in length (cf. n. on pedes quadra- genos) was laid across it at right angles to the balks and therefore parallel to the line of the wall: this beam was probably mortised into the balks of the layer below' and above it, its lowrer half being buried in the balks and nibble of the first layer and its upper half in those of the layer above it: it served to clamp the balks and rubble together; this was done between the several layers and so the whole wall was considerably strengthened and prevented from being pulled apart {distrahi).
23	directae]	‘at right angles’, i.e. to the line of the wall; perpetuae vriih-
out break or interruption, i.e. the beams were laid down at intervals of tw'o feet along the whole course of the proposed wall. The words in longitudinem are not so clear; H. takes them to mean * in the straight line of the wall ’.
28	neque inter se contingant trabes'] it is quite possible that the successive
layers wrere so laid, that beam rested on beam, interval on interval, instead of in the way described above; if it be so, trabes here will not denote any two beams but the several w’hole vertical lines of beams which were prevented from touching each other by the intervening lines of rubble and stones. The sentence following will suit either interpretation equally well.
cum...turn] ‘ both...and’. in speciem varictalemque i in point of its diversified appearance ’.
p. 13. 3 pedes quadragenos introrsus revincta] these words must be taken together meaning that the framework of each layer was braced together inside for distances of 40 ft., i.e. that these tie-beams were about 40 ft. long.
Chap. 24,
latum pedes cccxxx] it is scarcely credible that the breadth of the agger should have been more than four times its height. G. proposes longum for latum: he also thinks the height too great and proposes to read xxxx. for lxxx., but the agger at the siege of Massilia was 80 ft. high, B.C. II. 1. Rustow thinks that generally speaking a breadth at the bottom of from 50 to 60 ft. would be sufficient for an agger of 80 ft. in height.
consuetudine] cf. VI. 27 hue cum se eonsitetudine reclinaverunt; in II. 19 and elsewhere sua is added: ex is often used as in I. 52.
paullo ante tertiam vigiliam]	cf. n. on 3.
13 cuniculo\ this is not one of the Roman cuniculi but a countermine made by the Gauls.
eodemque tempore\ the accumulation of ablatives in this sentence should be noticed.
P. C
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VIL
ab utroque latere turrium] ‘on either side of the towers*, the turret are the turres ambulatoriae which the Romans had placed on their agger. The Gauls made a sortie from two of their gates and attacked the Roman earthwork on either flank.
iaciebant...fundebant] it is not certain whether Caesar intends any
distinction between iacere and fundere; if he does iacere is probably to throw with the hands, fundere to throw by mechanical means, ‘ to sling*, the word is unusual in this sense, but Caesar was perhaps thinking of the distinction between iaculatores and funditores. Observe that he adds to the vividness of his description by omitting the copula between iacicbant and fundebant. Cf. end of n.
interscinderent]	it would not be difficult to cut through the successive
stages (perhaps 10 in number) of the agger, each of which was penetrated by a cuniculus,
21 ex castris] to be taken with concurrent; cf. II. 11 omnis ex fuga Suessionum multitudo...convenit.
Chap. 25.
deustos pluteos] the plutei here mentioned are screens or breastworks of wickerwork covered with raw hides, which were fixed on the turret as a defence to the soldiers.
nee facile adire] the negative must only be taken with facile adire, ‘and perceived that they did not easily approach’; or nee facile may — et difficulter.
apertos] ‘exposed’, unprotected in consequence of the loss of the plutei.
recentes defessis succederent] ‘came up in fresh bodies to reinforce those who were worn out*. Cf. cum integri defessis succederent 41, de- fetigati non facile recentes atque integros sustinebant 48, integri et recentes defeligatis succederent V. 16, cum recentes atque integri defessis successissent B.C. in. 94, in these passages recentes seems to mean ‘freshly arrived*, isitegri ‘unwounded’ or ‘unfatigued*.
visum] the participle is here equivalent to cum visum esset.
e regione] ‘in a line withi.e. ‘over against’, ‘opposite’, cf. 36 e regione oppidi. For regio f ‘line’, cf. 46 recta regione.
per manus traditas] ‘passed on from hand to hand*: cf. Livy v. 51 traditae per manus religiones; I. 3 regnum per manus tradidity where the expression is used in a less literal sense than here; in B. C. II. 2 Caesar has agger inter manus proferebatur, cf. infra 47 per manus demissae; vin. 15 fasces. ..per manus ...inter se traditos.
scorpione] the name scorpio is here and in Bell. Afric. 29 applied to the missile thrown by the machine called scorpio which was a kind of catapult. Its construction is elaborately described by Ammianus, qu. in Forcellini; unless indeed the scorpio of this date was of a somewhat different construction. Cf. S. D. A. ‘ tormentum1.
igitized by GoogleChap. 26.
p. 14. 7 consilium...profugere] consilium capere is often followed by the infinitive. Cf. 71.
neque...et] cf. n. on 20.
12	perpetua] ‘without a break*.
ad insequendum tardabat] the same phrase occurs again 67, cf. below, ad capiendam fugam impediret‘, ad defendendum impediretur B. C. I. 25, ad transeundum impediretur 62.
non recipit] * does not admit of*.
significare] ‘ give intimations *.
quo timore] timore pert, may form a single expression = ‘ frightened’, and quo—qua re; but K. takes quo timore to be for cuius rei timore, rightly, I think, on the analogy of such phrases as qua spe adducti iv. 6.
Chap. 27.
directis operibus] ‘brought into position*, lit. ‘set straight*, ‘directed*; if this reading be right opera must mean military machines, and I agree with L. in doubting whether this interpretation is possible, notwithstanding Nepos Milt. 7, which might seem to countenance it. L. reads perfectis from an inferior ms ; G. suggests porrectis. [For opera = machines Mr Reid refers to Livy xxxvn. 5, operibus oppugnare urbem, but in this passage as in xxv. 11 Livy appears to draw some distinction between opera and machinae: Weissenborn explains opera to mean aggeres, cuniculi etc.]
28 inter castra vineasque] so H. for the usual intra vineas, expeditis, ‘ ready for action *.
30 qui ascendis sent...proposuit] compare this with v. 58 magna proponit eis qui regem occiderint praemia, R. § 1740.
32 murum compleverunt] in 12 murum complere is used in a different sense.
Chap. 28.
p. 15.	1	in	foro	ac	locis patentioribus] cf. n. on 4 ex oppido Gergovia, for
the nature of the Gallic oppida.
cuneatim] the Lexx. only quote one other instance of this word, Appul. Met. vili. 165. They formed themselves in close wedge-shaped masses {cunei).
obviam veniretur) I have followed F. and K. in omitting contra before veniretur [was contra a marginal explanation of obviam or obviam of contra ?] Others, perhaps rightly, retain the two words.
4	circumfundi]	the subject of this verb must be supplied from neminem,
cf. Hor. Sat. I. 1. 1, qui fit, Maecenas, ut nemo quam sibi sortem | seu ratio dederit seu fors obiecerit, illa \ contentus vivat, laudet diversa sequentes / where the subject of laudet * everyone’ must be supplied from the foregoing ‘no one*.
268	DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
continenti impctu] cf. Liv. XXII. 15, quinquefer me millia continenti cursu secutus est fugientes.
Cenabi caede] ‘the slaughter of Cenabum *, i. e. at Cenabum. It is not easy to say whether Cenabi here is genitive or a locative=cacde Cenabi facta.
ne qua] on the form qua cf. Kenn. § 68, note. The clause ne... oreretur depends on veritus, ‘fearing lest’; the clause ut...curaret follows on excepit, ‘ he received them in such a way as to take care ’: the word sic should perhaps be inserted before silentio; there is some trace of it in the mss.
misericordia vo/gi] the same expression occurs 15, where see note.
disparandos] disparare is rather a rare word. Forcellini qu. Plaut. Rudens 10, Cic. de Rep. 11. 39 ; tr. ‘took care that they should be dispersed and conducted to their fellow-countrymen in whatever part of the camp each several tribe had in the first instance had its quarters allotted’. The Latin idiom does not admit of a literal translation.
Chap. 29.
concilio] Caesar might have avoided the alliteration in this sentence by writing indicto for convocato, cf. II. 10. As Desj. remarks, this concilium was a council of war and must be distinguished from the popular concilia so frequent among the Gauls.
se animo demitterent] demittere se animo is less common than demittere animum or animos.
non virtute] ‘it is not by valour nor in open fight that the Romans have overcome you, but by a mere trick of strategy and by their skill in siege operations in which you have yourselves had no experience’. There is something of contempt in the words artificio quodam.
err arc] in oratio recta, erratis si qui expcctatist ‘you are mistaken whoever of you expect’.
omnes secundos rerum proventus] ‘none but successful issues’; cf. 80 pugnae proventum. For proventus cf. Liv. xlv. 41 aliarum deinde secundarum rerum velut proventus secutus, where the word is qualified by velut: it means properly ‘crop’, ‘produce’; cf. v. 24 frumentum angustius provenerat. Plin. Ep. I. 13 has magnum proventum poetarum hic annus attulit. B. C. 11. 3^*
sibinumquam] in or. rect. mi hi numquam placuit...cuius rei testes vosmet ipsos habeo, ‘I never approved of the defence of Avaricum, and of this ye are yourselves my witnesses’; for the fact cf. 15.
factum] for the omission of esse cf. 20 factum and persuasum.
obsequentia] ‘compliance’. There is perhaps no other certain instance of the use of this word: see Plaut. Asinaria 64.
Chap. 30.
16.	3	animo	defecerat]	‘lost heart’. It would appear from these re
marks that the Gaulish chieftains were in the habit of absconding in case they met with reverses.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAneque se abdiderat et fugerat\ ‘had not concealed himself and avoided’. The two clauses abdiderat and fugerat are united by et in one negative clause beginning with neque. Cf. v. 17 neque consistendi aut ex essedis desiliendi facultatem.
plusque] ‘and he was thought to have all the more mental foresight and prescience because at the very outset he had first decided that Av. should be burnt, afterwards that it should be evacuated’. For re integra cf. Cic. p. Mur. 43.
eius affirmatione] ‘in consequence of his assertion*: the word is somewhat rare.
consternati] this is the MSS reading. N.’s conjecture confirmati is rejected by H. but accepted by K. and Vielhaber. The whole tone of the sentence points rather to consternati than to confirmati.
Chap. 31.
animo laborabat]	‘exercised his mind1. Notice the different verbs
with which animo has been joined in 29—31; se demittere, deficere, pro- videre, consternari, laborare.
capere posset] ‘could win them*, others less well read capi, taking quisque to be each of the principes.
imperat] imperare has a double construction here (i) imperat cert. num.
mil. civ. as in 4 civitatibus obsides imperat, (ii) imperat quem {numerum) adduci velit like 16 quid fieri vellet imperabat. With quem et quam ante diem cf. 4 armorum quantum quodque ante tempus. Tacitus Ann. vi. 12 has quem intra diem. For the tense of redintegrarentur cf. n. on 9.
id quod Av. deperierat] ‘the loss at Av.* For the number of the slain cf. 28.
et quos] = et cum iis quos.
Chap. 32.
ex labore ref eat] cf. III. 5 seque ex labore reficerent.
ipso anni tempore] abl. of cause ‘in consequence of’, cf. 11 diei tempore exclusus.
p. 17. * legati] ‘ as envoys*.
necessario] ‘urgent’, cf. 40.
magistratus] Caesar gives the title of Vergobretus to these magistrates I. 16: the word is said to mean ‘dealer of judgment*.
florentem] ‘ influential *.
atque ipsuni] ‘himself too*.
eundem magistratum gesserit] hence Cotus could not lawfully hold the office; cf. next chapter.
senalum] the council of elders, populum the general assembly of the people.
Digitized by CjOO^lCDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
pars] ‘half*, cf. Lucr. I. 617.
positum in] ‘it rests with’.
Chap. 33.
detrimentosum]	this word does not occur elsewhere.
aluisset...omasset] the subjunctive is used in this clause to express Caesar’s thoughts.
ad vim atque arma descenderet] this use of descendere is explained by Forcellini ‘dicimus descendere in certamen, in aciem, in dimicationem, et similia Ais, quia velut ex loco superiore ac tuto in planum et periculosum drjenimus\ The constant use of the word in this sense was probably suggested by the position of the forum and the arena at Rome, which were on a lower level than the surrounding space, and persons going into them were said *descendere in forum\ etc. Cf. Hor. Carm. III. I. 10, hic generosior descendat in campum petitor; Cic. div. in Caec. § 1.
quae] Mr Reid suggests cui minus con/.t making Caesar the subject of the verb. Some mss omit sibi.
praevertendum]	‘thought that this matter ought to be attended to
first*.
de iure aut de legibus] ius is ‘law* in the widest and most general sense of the term; leges special written enactments or statutes.
quos inter controversia esse/]=eos inter quos controversia esset: for the position of inter cf. Mayor on Cic. Phil. § 18, for the subj. esset cf. I. 16 interim Caesar Aeduos frumentum quod essent publice polliciti flagitare which is thus explained by Prof. Kennedy § 191: essent is virtually a suboblique subjunctive, i.e. it is subjunctive because subordinate to another verb implied in the principal verb flagitare, the sentence being equivalent to imperabat Aeduis ut darent frumentum quod polliciti essent: so this sentence might be explained as = ius sit eos venire inter quos controversia esset. A slightly different treatment of these subjunctives will be found in R. § 1740 where they are classed under the head of subjunctives of reported definition, and so K. on this passage ‘ those who, according to the report of the Aedui, were at strife ’.
Decetiam] D£cize on the Loire where it is joined by the Arron.
convenisset—doceretur] notice change of tense—‘had assembled’, 'he was (being) informed’. There is a change of subject, Caesar being the subject of doceretur.
aho loco etc.] ‘at a place and time other than was proper’.
renuntiatum] ‘declared elected*, a technical term in the Roman comitia.
p. 18. i intermissis magistratibus] this is explained by K. to mean in the interregnum or interval between the outgoing of one magistrate and the appointment of his successor: in case the outgoing magistrate failed to appoint a successor, the election fell to the Druids; in this instance the
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAoutgoing magistrate Valetiacus had nominated his own brother Cotus, thus transgressing the law (leges duo ex una familia etc.); Convictolitavis on the other hand had been rightfully appointed by the priests after Valetiacus had gone out, and Caesar therefore decided that he should continue to hold (1obtinere) office.
Chap. 34.
3 hoc decreto interposito] ‘after interposing this decree*, interponere edictum often occurs. Cf. Cic. p. Caec. 71 (Jordan).
omissis rebus] I have followed K. in omitting his which is found in nearly all MSS before rebus. servirent ‘devote themselves to’.
g	in Senones] join ducendas in Senones. For Senones cf. n. on 4.
Gergoviam] a town on the left bank of the Allier 3 or 4 miles S. of
Clermont Ferrand on a hill which still retains the name of Gergovia. On leaving Decetia Caesar appears to have marched in a S.W. direction till he came to the banks of the Allier, somewhere in the neighbourhood of Moulins, and then, being prevented by the enemy from crossing, he marched southwards up the right bank secundum flumen Elaver. On secundum flumen cf. Mr Long’s note.
interruptis'] Verc. being on the left bank while the Romans were on the right could not be hindered from destroying the bridges, qua re it need hardly be said refers to Caesar’s southward march, not to his distribution of the cavalry, ab altera parte fluminis must be taken with iter facere coepit.
Chap. 35.
cum uterque] the text is very doubtful. F. retains the reading of the best MSS cum uterque utrimque exisset exercitus, in conspectu fereque e regione castris castra ponebant which is scarcely intelligible though defended by N. and Vielhaber.
dispositis etc.] ‘in consequence of the enemy having stationed scouts in various directions to see that the Romans did not make a bridge anywhere and transport their forces, Caesar’s position was one of great embarrassment*. One would rather have expected Caesar erat in magn. dijf. instead of Caesaris res, cf. 6 Caesar magna difficultate afficiebatur.
necubi] this word is a compound not of nec-\-ubi but of ne + cubi ‘lest anywhere cf. ubicubi alicubi nuncubisicubi Corss. II. 839. ubi itself is a shortened form of evobi or quobi which is made up of the stem of the relative qui and the suffix bi found in datives such as tibi sibi, and is related to the Greek kov or tov just as uter, shortened from evoter or quoter (cf. necuter), is related to icbrcpos or Trorepos.
34 captis quibusdam cohortibus] this passage is almost hopeless: for captis K. gives the following list of proposed alterations carptis, sectis, laxatis, detractis, interceptis, partitis, subtractis or subreptis, to which add Madvig’s suggestion cavis [poterantne cohortes quae quadratae extremis
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA72	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
ordinibus plenis introrsus inanes erant cavae dici? Might not Caesar have written cavatis in this sense?]. N. proposed to write misit maniplis singulis demptis cohortibus; Feldbausch (ap. Long) captis quartis quibusque cohortibus, i.e. out of the 60 cohorts of the 6 legions C. removed every fourth cohort, so taking 19 cohorts or 2 legions wanting one cohort; but if C. had meant this, would he not have expressed himself differently? C. evidently wanted his 4 legions to look like 6 when in marching order and seen from the side: hence the words captis qu. coh. or whatever else C. wrote must be intended to explain the method by which this result was brought about.
progredi]	I read this now after two MSS in preference to egredi which
seems meaningless.
sublicis] ‘piles*.
legionibusque'] que connects legionibus traductis with effecto opere not with et loco delecto: que...et in the sense of ‘both...and’ not being considered good Latin by the prose writers of the period.
Chap. 36.
32 quintis castris] ‘on the 5th day*. Nap. thinks that C. crossed the Allier at Varennes nearly 48 miles from Gergovia, and as his last day’s march was certainly short, and the first day’s probably so, this is about the distance that an army would make in five days in a difficult and unknown country. V. had arrived in time to fortify a camp before C. came.
equestri proelio levi] eq. proel. is regarded almost as a single word, ‘cavalry-skirmish’, and hence an adjective levi can be added to it. Cf. privata navis oneraHa maxima Cic. Verr. v. 136 where the words priv. nav. on. form a single idea=‘private-merchantman*; so vento secundo vehementi Liv. XXIX. 27 ‘a strong fair-wind’. This collocation of adjectives must be carefully distinguished from a mere string of epithets such as vir sapiens fortis doctus — ‘ a wise and brave and learned man *.
p. 19.. I altissimo monte] the greatest height of the plateau of M. Gergovia is about 2430 feet.
circum se] Nap. remarks that the steepness of the north face of the hill precludes the possibility of there having been any encampments on that side.
separativi] the same plan was adopted by V. in his camp before Avaricum; cf. 19 Galli generatim distributi in civitates and 28 end. Join collocaverat circum se mediocribus intervallis ‘ with slight intervals between them*. According to G. these camps were placed round Gergovia on a terrace which is said to run nearly all the way round the hill, and is from 12 to 15 paces in width, and in some places only about 12 feet below the summit.
iugi collibus] iugum is here the mountain range, and colles are various elevations forming part of it; so it is often used in the dural, iuvat ire iugis Verg. G. III. 292; mutato itinere iugis Octogesam perveniret
GoogleCapp. 35—37]	NOTES.
Caes. B. C. I. 70, cf. Verg. Eel. ix. 6 qua se subducere colles \ incipiunt moll 1 que iugum demittere clivo, ‘from where the hills | begin retreating and let down their ridge|with gentle slope’. (Prof. Kennedy.)
qua despici poterat etc.] this sentence is undoubtedly faulty, but it is not easy to correct it. Vielhaber would strike out atque and qua...praebebat as late glosses.
quid in quoque etc.] animi and virtutis depend on quid’ suorum on quoque; the interrogative pronoun quis attracts the distributive quisque towards itself; cf. Cic. Off. ill. 17 magni est iudicis statuere quid quemque cuique praestare oporteat. With periclitaretur (so Schneider and Diibner after the inferior mss) cf. 11. 8 cotidie equestribus proeliis quid hostis virtute posset ct quid nostri auderent periclitabatur; others read perspiceret or perspiceretur.
coins'] la Roche Blanche, an isolated hill 1850 feet in height about half a mile S. of Gergovia.
aquae] * water supply’.
sed is locus] the connexion of thought which at first sight is not quite clear is as follows: ‘By gaining this position they would injure the enemy, but it was fortified, though not strongly, hosuever (i. e. notwithstanding that it was fortified) Caesar made the attempt’. K. has unwisely followed Schneider in moving tamen from its place before silentio and putting it after Jirmo.
fossam duplicem] a line of two parallel ditches each 12 feet wide.
a maioribus castris ad minora] by minora castra is meant the camp of the two legions on la Roche Blanche; the maiora castra were about a mile distant situated E. by S. of Gergovia.
tuto] adverb: * without danger from a sudden incursion of the enemy*. In 14 tutus is followed by ab.
Chap. 37.
imperio natos] ‘born for command*, imperio is dative.
distineat] * hinder ’ ‘ prevent *. distineat has better MSS authority than detineat, cf. Cic. Phil. XII. 28; Livy 11. 15, xxxvn. 12.
32 esse nonnullo etc.] ‘he was under some obligation to Caesar but only so far that the cause he had gained at his hands was a perfectly just one ’.
p. 20. I ad Caesarem disceptatorem veniant] ‘ have recourse to the arbitration of Caesar ’.
4 principes] cf. 1 Carnutes se principes ex omnibus bellum facturos pollicentur.
quae mitterentur] ‘which w’ere by way of being sent Besides the 10000 infant,/ Caesar had requested the Aedui to send their whole cavalry force, cf. 34«
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO, [Comm. VII.
Chap. 38.
m.p. xxx] possibly near Serbannes: Nap.
insimulati proditionis] cf. 19 iniquitatis.
indicta causa] ‘without a hearing*.
quae gesta sunt] for the indicative cf. n. on 5 quam legatis pronuntiarunt.
an dubitamus] it must be remembered that an is used to introduce the second member of a disjunctive interrogative sentence, the first being introduced by utrum or the enclitic tie, e.g. utrum cepisti libros an reliquisti? In the present sentence the first member introduced by utrum or ne is understood, not expressed.
persequamur mortem] * avenge their death *. Cf. 6i<!)K€tr <f>6row, Eur. Or. 153+.
numerum] ‘quantity*. The word is so used generally of natural
products. Cp. VIII. 34 magnum numerum frumenti comparant.
p. 21. i fecerit] ‘as he himself has done\ The general verb facere takes the place of persequi. For a harsher use of facere cf. 42 idem eos cogunt facere, where faccrc=exire cx oppido to be supplied from the foregoing cx oppido educunt.
Chap. 39.
do mi] ‘in his own country*. For the case of do mi, cf. n. on 10
Agedinci.
nominatim] * by name’, * specially*.
ia quod futurum provideat] the clause is regarded as a subordinate one, hence the subjunctive; otherwise C. would have written quod se futurum providere. Cf. the last sentence of the present chapter and 14 quibus amissis bellum geri non possit; 64 id quod magis futurum confidat, and Liv. XXIV. 3 fama est aram esse in vestibulo templi cuius cinerem nullus unquam moz'eat ventus (so Weissenborn and Draeger, but Roby § 1794 reads nullo moveri vento).
levi momento aestimare] abi. of price; ‘reckon of slight account*. momentum is properly the inclination of the scale of a balance.
Chap. 40.
expeditas] ‘lightly equipped*, ‘ready for action*.
contrahenda castra] a camp intended for six legions would be too large for two legions to defend in case of attack; hence, if time had allowed, C. would have contracted it to the requisite dimensions.
70	resposita] ‘success seemed dependent on quickness*. Cf. v. 29.
m. p. XXV] perhaps at Randan, a few miles S. of Serbannes: see beginning of 38.
ne quemquam] ‘not to kill a single individual*, ne quem would have been more usual but less emphatic.
et proiectis etc.] K. points out that this sentence might seem toCapp. 38—43]	NOTES.	75
break the grammatical rule that in stating three or more perfectly coordinate words or sentences we may either connect each of them with the preceding by a conjunction or omit the conjunction altogether or annex que to the last (Madv. Synt. § 434, obs. 1; R. § 2202), but et here joins ded. sign, and mart. depr. and makes them into a single sentence, so that there are really only two coordinate sentences, viz. (i) manus tendere and (ii) ded. sign. et mort. deprec. Cf. Madv. on Cic. Fin. iv. 56.
33	Gergoviam profugit] to do this he must have passed Caesar, who was
five miles nearer to Gergovia.
Chap. 41.
medio fere itinere] about 12 miles from Gergovia, Caesar having advanced a distance of about 25 miles from that place.
p. 22.	5 quanto res in periculofuerit ]4 how critical their position has been*.
The messengers said, ‘we have been in danger not ‘we are in danger’, hence the use offuerit not sit.
isdem] in apposition to quibus, ‘without relief*.
vallo'] the vallum with which the Romans fortified the camp was a rampart of earth surmounted by a palisade or breastwork made of stakes (valli)t outside the vallum was a trench [fossa)f usually about 12 ft. broad and 9 ft. deep.
omnis generis] the gen. is dependent on telorum, ‘weapons of every
kind ’.
obstruere] notice the present tenses in this sentence; the messengers
said, ‘Fabius is (now) engaged in blocking the gates’.
pluteos] cf. n. on 25.
Chap. 42.
levem auditionem] ‘regard mere hearsay as ascertained fact*.
adiuvat rem proclinatam] ‘helps to precipitate matters’. A literal translation is perhaps impossible. Caesar uses the same phrase in a letter to Cicero, Ep. Att. X. 8. B. proclinata iam re.
sanitatem] ‘a sound mind’. Cf. v. 7 nihil hunc pro sano facturum.
fide data] ‘after giving him a solemn assurance of safety’.
faeer£\ i. e. to cjuit Cavillonum. Cf. n. on 38, fecerit. Cavillonum is Chalons-sur-Saone in the department of Saone-et-Loire. For qui negotiandi, etc. cf. n. on 3.
Chap. 43.
quaestionem] ‘decree an investigation into the plunder of the pro
perty’.
p. 23. 3 capti] ‘induced by the gain accruing from’, ea rest i.e. direptio bonorum.
appellat] ‘addresses’.
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
ab Gergovia] ‘from the neighbourhood of Gergovia*: slightly different in meaning from the simple abl. after discedere, which would have been equally good Latin, as Cic. says, Ep. ad Att. vii. 21, eo die Capua discessi; cf. R. § 1259. Caesar here confesses that his expedition to Gergovia was very nearly proving a failure.
ne videretur] ‘how he might retire, so that his departure might not seem*, etc. K. For the case of fugae which is probably genitive, see my note on v. 53.
Chap. 44.
minora castra] cf. n. on 36, collis. It was only when Caesar came to the smaller camp on La Roche that he saw that an elevation forming part of the range of Risolles (on the W. of the hill of Gergovia, with which it was connected by a ridge called Les Goules), had been apparently deserted (nudatum hominibus). Desjardins is of opinion that it was the Puy de Jussat that Caesar saw deserted by the Gauls.
quorum magnus] this remark will suggest an answer to Mr Long’s question as to how Caesar knew what Vercingetorix said to his soldiers at the siege of Avaricum, 20.
sed silvestre et angustum] this, the reading of the inferior MSS, is preferred by Madvig Adv. 11. 255 to the usual sed hunc silvestrem et angustum. If the latter be retained, as it is by K. and F., dorsum must be considered masc. from dorsus and sedhunc— 4 but also*.
alteram partem] the other or opposite, i.e. the west, side. Caesar being encamped E. of the town would naturally speak of the W. side as altera pars oppidi.
uno colle occupato] the Romans had occupied La Roche; the Gauls now thought it necessary to prevent their occupying alterum collem, i. e. a part of the iugum above-mentioned, by which there wras an access to the town by the woody and narrow defile of Les Goules. Nap. says that the foundations of the town-gates which opened on this ridge have lately been laid bare. The Gauls then withdrew their forces from one of the eastern elevations of Risolles on which Caesar had seen them massed in great numbers the day before, in order to concentrate them at the threatened point, probably the S.W. face of Risolles, by which the Romans would have to ascend if they tried to occupy the hill and with it the approach to the town by way of Les Goules. In the above explanation I have followed Napoleon in preference to Goler.
Chap. 45.
de media node] to be taken with vagentur, ‘ immediately after midnight ’, cf. 88.
impedimentorum] ‘pack horses* cf. VIII. 14.
deque his] so Davies, followed by K. The text is very doubtful.
collibus] for the abl. cf. Vergil’s iuvat ire iugis and below eodem iugo, with which Vielhaber compares Liv. It. 50 ni iugo circummissus Veicns in verticem collis evasisset; so too B. C. I. 70 ut iugis Octogesam perveniret.
Googlep. 24. 6 illo] ‘ thither \ i. e. to the place whither they observed C. sending some of his troops. The words ad munitionem, if correct, probably= ad muniendum. The best mss have illo munitionum, which makes little or no sense. Vielhaber, I think rightly, proposes to strike out the word as a marginal explanation of illo.
qui animadverterentur] I have retained qui the reading of the best MSS which is defended by Vielhaber (Zeitschrift f. Oest. Gymn. 1870, p. 533)* The Gauls seeing a few (raros ‘ a few at a time ’) soldiers passing from one camp to the other would not suppose that there was anything going on beyond the ordinary communication between the two camps.
quid...incommodi] Caesar likes to separate quid from its dependent
genitive. Cf. 36 quid in quoque.
alio ascensu] on the E. side of the town.
Ciiap. 46.
18	ascensus] ‘the ascent to Gergovia’, recta regione, ‘in a straight
line’. Notice the indicative aberat where one would have expected abesset. Instead of saying, ‘if there were no bend it would be 1200 paces’, he says, ‘if there were no bend (‘without reckoning the bend’) it was 1200 paces’. Cf. R. 1574 and Cic. div. in Caec. 21 cur noluit, etiam si taceant, satis dicunt.
20 a medio fere colle] ‘about half way up the hill ’. This wall probably encircled the hill; the Gallic camps (cf. 36) lay all round between it and the summit on which the town of Gergovia was situated, ut natura montis ferebat, * as the nature of the mountain allowed ’.
superiorem partem] the superior pars collis is, of course, the higher part of the mountain between the town of Gergovia on the level summit and the Gallic wall; so inferior pars is the lower part of the mountain below the Gallic wall.
28 ut conquieverat] ‘just as (not in the sense of ‘just when’) he had lain down to rest ’; cf. 61 ut erant dispositi and elsewhere.
ex matiibus...eriperet] cf. IV. 12 ex periculo eripere and Drag. II. S. I. 219.
Chap. 47,
proposuerat] there is probably an ellipse of sibi, in which case animo is abl.
receptui cani] it is not certain whether cant is impersonal or whether the subject of cani is signum receptui (signum being understood, not expressed), * ordered the signal for retreat to be sounded ’. Cf. R. pref. vol. 11. p. xxxiii. and § 1156. Caesar tells us that he had accomplished his purpose, but we may reasonably ask what object he could have had in storming only a small portion of the Gallic camp and immediately retiring? Such an assault would inflict but little loss on the enemy and W’ould put them more on their guard for the future, and so make the task of taking the town still harder, if not impossible.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGjS	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm.	VII.
signa constituit] ‘planted their standards*, i.e. made them halt, probably near the present village of Merdogne. See the first position of the tenth legion as marked in the map. The tenth was Caesar’s favourite legion, of. I. 40 end. The word contionatus * having harangued them * is probably wrong. G. suggests continuo, which K. adopts. Heller would read clivum nandus.
p. 25. i valles] the valley of Merdogne a village on the S.E. slope of Gergovia. Caesar was to the E., the other legions to the W. of this valley.
tamcn] they had not heard the signal for retreat, but nevertheless they were held in check by their officers.
11 vestem\ it should be remembered that the plural vestes in the sense of garments, clothes, is scarcely found in the classical prose writers of this period.
prominentes] ‘ thrusting themselves forward *, * bending over ’ the wall.
Avaricensibus praemiis] ‘ the rewards offered at Avaricum *, cf. 27.
manipulares\ soldiers of the maniple—‘privates’. A legion contained 10 cohorts, a cohort 3 maniples, a maniple 2 centuries; a century consisted of from 50 to 60 men. This will serve as an approximate account of the strength of the legion in Caesar’s time, cf. Kraner’s preface, § 13.
Chap. 48.
ut supra demonstravimus] cf. last line of 44.
primo] adverb.
passum capillum] cf. note on II. 13.
spatio] = diuturnitate. K.
Chap. 49.
p. 26. i praemetuens'] the verb is rare and means ‘fearing beforehand*, ‘anticipating danger*.
misit] ‘sent’ implies ‘sent orders* hence ut educeret.
sub infimo colle] the hill of La Roche on which was the minora castra. See the map in this edition for the first position of Sextius.
quominus] = terreret hostes quominus libere insequerentur.
paulum progressus] see the map for the second position of the tenth legion. It should perhaps be placed a little to the left of the first position instead of to the right of it, and the first position should be moved a little to the right.
Chap. 50.
9 ab latere nostris aperto] ‘on our exposed flank’, i.e. on the right flank.
mantis distinendae causa] ‘to separate the enemy’s forces’.
pacatorum] this is the best conjecture that has been made for the
untranslateable pacatum. H. proposes pactum.
muro praecipitabantur] the omission of the preposition is unusual. Livy ix. 22 has equo praecipitare.Capp. 47—53]
eiusdem legionis] the Vlllth,
sanguis viresque] these two words are not unfrequently thus connected, cf. Verg. Aen. II. 639.
postpauluni\ ‘a little while after*, not ‘after a little while*.
Chap. 51.
paulo aequiore loco] A. von Kampen is very likely right in his view that this third position of the Xth legion should be placed farther south than it is in the map and close to the duplex fossa. The line of retreat of the Romans lay in a southerly direction close past the hill of La Roche Blanche. It probably terminated, says von Kampen, by the village of Donnezat at the foot of the east slope of that hill.
exceperunt] ‘covered*.
p. 27. i locum superiorem] apparently on the east slope of La Roche Blanche, not on the Puy de Marmant where it is placed by Napoleon and in my map.
2 ttbi primum planitiem attigerunt] i. e. when in their retreat they reached the level ground; so long as they were on the ascent to Gergovia they could not withstand the onset of the Gauls who were pressing down on them from above.
5	desiderati] ‘missed*, compare a similar use of the word in V. 23, and
elsewhere. For the construction cf. 15 amplius viginti urbes.
Chap. 52.
cupiditatem] ‘ardour*.
quod ipse] ‘which (as) he had himself experienced at Avaricum *. If the MSS quid be retained, tr. (he shewed them) ‘what he had himself experienced*.
exploratam victoriam] cf. n. on 15.
modestiam et continentiam] ‘ subordination and restraint *; for modestia cf. Liv. viri. 7 exanimati omnes tam atroci imperio metu magis quam modestia quievere.
Chap. 53.
nihilo minus] this is the mss reading, but mosteditors write magis. Mr Long keeps minus, I think rightly. Vercingetorix came down to the level ground notwithstanding that he saw Caesar’s forces drawn up in a strong position.
satis etc.] under this phrase Caesar affects to hide the complete discomfiture of his plans. He had evidently come to Gergovia with the intention of reducing the place by blockade, if it should prove impossible to take it by storm. One day, when circumstances seemed favourable, he had attempted an assault, but the assault had signally failed : he had found himself unable, either from the difficulty of provisioning his army or from some other reason, to continue the siege, and now he is forcedDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
to retire and to satisfy, as far as might be, himself and his readers with the remark that he had done enough ‘to minish the Gallic haughtiness ’.
pontes rejicit] probably at Vichy. G., Nap.
Chap. 54.
p. 28.	5-	retinendos constituit] “the gerundive with constituere as in 36;
more frequent with statuere”, K.
suspicionem] so spelt by Corssen Aussprache II. 359; others write
suspitio, cf. Mayor on Cic. Phil. 11. 114. [See now Mr Reid’s Appendix A to his edition of Cic. p. Archia, Pitt Press Series.]
17	sed omnium] = seemed to have reached a position of greater dignity
and influence than ever before.
Chap. 55.
Noviodunum] Nevers; not the Noviodunum mentioned in 12.
17 pecuniam publicam] the chief portion of this would go towards the soldiers’ pay. Each legionarius received at this time 120 denarii a year; the denarius was about 8\d. The soldiers appear to have received their pay either at the beginning or at the end of the year’s campaign. After nis return from Gaul Caesar increased the pay to 225 denarii, of which a third was paid every four months; the wages of a Roman day-labourer were about the same. Under Tiberius we find the Roman soldier complaining denis in diem assibus animam et corpus aestimari, Tac. Ann. 1. 17.
coemptum] so K. after two good mss; H. has coemptorum; F. badly coemptos.
22 Bibracti] Bibracte was on M. Beuvray 12 or 13 miles W. of Autun. For the case cf. n. on 10.
quique eo negotiandi] cf. n. on 3.
nequo esset usui] ne quo — ‘lest for any purpose’, quo is the reading of the best MSS but is usually altered to cui. Cf. R. pref. vol. II. p. xxx. For usui cf. n. on 4.
p. 29.	4 aul adductos inopia in provinciam expellere] this is the ordinary
reading but the words are bracketed by Schneider and K. as neither grammatical nor suited to the context. Cf. Mr Long’s note. Vielhaber, however, defends them (with ,the substitution of et for aut), though not satisfactorily. All the best mss have ex provincia.
Chap. 56.
9 nam ut commutato] I have followed Madvig’s reading (Adv. II. 258). necessario is an adverb.
abiuncto] “abiungcre is only used here in Caesar and very seldom elsewhere” K. Perhaps the only other certain instance of the word is Verg. Georg, ill. 518 : the passage in Cic. Ep. Att. II. 1. 3 is supposed by some to be spurious.
ad Ligerem venii] according to Nap., Caesar crossed the Loire at a place now called Bourbon-Lancy where there is still a ford.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIACapp. 54—58]
disposito equitatu\ Caesar usually placed two lines of horsemen abreast of the stream to be forded, between which the infantry waded across; one line to break the force of the current, the other to rescue any who were in danger of being swept away by it; cf. B. C. 1. 64, where we are told that from want of cavalry the baggage-horses had to do duty. Riistow Iieerwesen in. 105.
frumentum in agris] stored in bams, not standing in the fields, for it was now early spring, cf. 55 Liger ex nivibus creverat. in agris ‘in the country’.
Chap. 57.
eo supplemento] the troops which C. had levied during the winter
in Gallia Cisalpina.
summa imperii] ‘the chief command \ summa is here a noun of the first declension; in Ov. Am. I. 9, summa ducum Atrides, it is the neut. pi. of the adjective; cf.prima virorum Lucr. I. 86.
evocatus] Caesar possibly uses this word with a thought of its technical meaning as applied at Rome to discharged soldiers who were called out to serve on an emergency. Cf. 65. See however infra 58 quorum magna pars erat ad bellum evocata.
perpetuam] ‘unbroken’, ‘continuous*. The marsh here described is said by Nap. to be the low-lying land on the banks of the little river Essonne, which flows into the Seine opposite Corbeil. Labienus had been marching along the left bank of the Yonne and the Seine on his way from Sens to Paris; on arriving at this marsh, and finding himself unable to transport his army across in the face of the enemy, he turned back, crossed the Seine at Melun and then marched along the right bank to Paris.
quae influeret...impediref] the subjunctives show that this clause is not a mere statement of fact on the part of the writer, Caesar, in which case the indicative would have been used, but is subordinated to the previous clause cum animadvertisset, and so forms a part of the thought or observation of Camulogenus.
Chap. 58.
p. 30. 3 vineas agere] cf. n. on 17.
munire] this word meant originally to ‘bind together’, ‘construct’: hence mun. iter or viaiti — make a road.
confieri] as fio is used as the passive of facio, so confieri here = confici. The word is rare; cf. Verg. Aen. iv. 116, Tac. An. xv. 59.
Mctioscduni\ Melun about 30 miles from Paris. K. thinks that the name Melodunum which the editors generally adopt is a later name for the town, and originally applied only to a small settlement on the bank of the river. Desjardins attempts to distinguish between Melodunum (Melun) and Metiosedum (Meudon) mentioned at the end of 61, parva manu Metiosedum versus missa quae tantum progrediatur quantum naves processissent. He remarks that the vessels which went down stream are called by Caesar naves, w'hile those which Labienus sent up stream to deceive the Gauls are called lintres. The matter is very uncertain.
p. a	6DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
9	«>] 1 thereon*, ‘on board*; so B. C. III. 24.
refecto ponte] apparently the bridge connecting the island with the
right bank.
secundo flumine] ‘ down the stream *.
e regione Lutetiae'] of course on the left bank, Labienus having crossed to the right bank at Melun. Camulogenus may have been encamped on ground now occupied by the Faubourg St Jacques and the Boulevard St Michel. Labienus’ camp may have been where now is the Boulevard de Sebastopol. Desjardins.
Chap. 59.
a Gergorda] for the preposition cf. n. on 43.
interclusum itinere et Ligeri] i.e. prevented from marching and from crossing the Liger.
Bellovaci] a Belgian tribe situated N. of Lutetia. Their name survives in Beauvais. For an account of their power cf. II. 4.
27 cogitabat] ‘devised means*. K. points out that ut in this sentence has its usual final signification.
29 opinionem] ‘reputation*.
Chap. 60.
p. 31. 1 imperassct] the pluperfect is used because the command is viewed as preceding the action of the soldiers, and, therefore, past when that action takes place. Labienus’ actual words were of this kind : ea quae imperavero diligenter administrate. imperassct would also have been used if Labienus’ words had been ea quae imperavi administrate; but the commands had not been given at the time of his addressing them.
2 industrie] only quoted from Cato, Suetonius, Quintilian.
4 quattuor milia passuum] this would bring them, says Nap., to the village of Point-du-Jour.
culverso flu mi71 e] ‘up the stream’. By this manoeuvre the enemy
were thrown off the scent.
11	post paulo] cf. n. on post paulum 50.
Chap. 61.
13 ut omni] ‘just as they had been stationed here and there along the river’, i.e. they were overtaken and cut down just as they stood, without any opportunity of escaping or of summoning aid. For this use of tit cf. 46 end Tcut'ornatus in tabernaculo oppressus ut mem die conquieverat, and 68 ut collocaverat; and for inopinantes opprimuntur cf. 8 oppressis inopinantibus.
praeter consuetudinem tumultuard] ‘that there is an unusual commotion ’.
21 paulo infra] that is, near the village of Auteuii and le Point-du-Jour in the neighbourhood of the Bois de Boulogne.
26 progrediatur] one would expect progrederetur. Tr. ‘which is to advance*. For the locality see note on Metiosedum 58.Capp. 58—64]	NOTES.	83
Chap. 62.
p. 32. 5 quisquam] notice the emphatic position of this word at the end of the sentence.
eandem fortunam tulit Camulogenus] i.e. circumventus erat et interfectus.
collem ceperunt} probably some part of the high ground now occupied by the forts of Montrouge, Vauves and Issy. [Perhaps the hill of Vau- girard. Desjardins.]
neque\ = neque tamen. Cf. 45 neque tanto spatio certi quid esset explorari poterat.
16	montes] used with some exaggeration of the high ground above men
tioned.
18 die tertio] after inde some mss have diemt which is supposed to have arisen from die ill, that is, die tertio.
Chap. 63.
dubitantes territant] * the waverers’, cf. 7 timentes confirmat\
rationes belli gerendi] ‘ his plans for the campaign*.
31 Remi, Lingones, Treveri] the Remi were a powerful Belgic tribe occupying a tract of country corresponding roughly to the departments of Marne and Ardennes. Their chief town Durocortorum was afterwards called Remi from the name of the people, hence its modem name Rheims. For the Lingones cf. n. on 9. The Treveri, a Keltic tribe of considerable importance (cf. II. 24; v. 3), were situated on the left bank of the Rhine. They have given their name to the district of Trier and the town of Treves (Augusta Treverorum). We may gather from Cicero’s puns on the word that the second e was short in ordinary pronunciation (Ep. ad Fam. vii. 13).
Hit] the Remi and Lingones.
p. 33. i toto bello] ‘throughout the whole war*; abl. of duration of time: not ‘were absent from the whole war’, since Caesar always repeats the preposition with abesse. K. [Mr Reid proposes to read toti bcllo, and to take abesse as=deficere^ 'to fail*, but toto itself may be dative, cf. n. on 89.]
Chap. 64.
7 diemque ei ret] so F. K. has huic.
quem antea habuerat] this is a parenthetical remark of Caesar’s. Had it been part of the reported words of Vercingetorix habuerit would have been written.
13 modo corrumpant] ‘only let them destroy’, aedificia ‘bams*, as in 14.
16 Segusiavis] the Segusiavi occupied a region comprising the departments of Rhone and Loire. Lugdunum (Lyons) was at a later period their most important town.
2
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
Allobrogibus] the provinces of Dauphine and Savoy represent the domains of the Allobroges. Their largest town was Vienna, still Vienne. For the Gabali, Helvii, and Volcae Arecomici cf. 7; for the Ruteni, 5; for the Cadurci, 4.
Chap. 65.
%
provincia} the province of Gallia Narbonensis. Cf. 6.
Lucio Caesare] son of L. Julius Caesar, cos. B.c. 90, and himself cos. B.c. 64. He was a relative of C. Julius Caesar.
Caburi filio] Caburus had been presented with the Roman citizenship by C. Valerius Flaccus, w’hence he took the name of C. Valerius Caburus; cf. I. 47. He had two sons, C. Valerius Procillus (cf. I. 19) and C. Valerius Donnotaurus.
34. i equitatu superiores] we read of 15,000 cavalry in 64.
Germaniam] Caesar had twice crossed the Rhine and invaded Germany, in the years 55 and 53 B.c. Cf. IV. 16—19; vi. 9—28. He had also conquered several German tribes who had entered Gaul.
levis armaturae pedites\ cf. n. on 18 expeditis.
evocatis] the evocati were men who had served their time and had re-enlisted at the invitation of the military authorities. They wrere exempted from many of the duties that fell to the lot of the rank and file. Cf. S.D.A.
Chap. 66.
Caesar] we read (56 end) that Caesar, after crossing the Loire on his march northward from Gergovia, proceeded to the country of the Senones. In 62 (end) it is stated that Labienus joined Caesar three days (?) after quitting Agedincum (Sens), whither he had come from Paris. The junction of the two forces is supposed by G. to have taken place at Troyes on the Seine, by Nap. at Joigny on the Yonne. Caesar now wished to march into the domain of the Sequani in order to be nearer the province; his line of march then lay according to G. from Troyes to Besantjon (Vesontio), according to Nap. from Joigny to Besanijron. Both authorities agree that he probably intended crossing the Saone in the neighbourhood of Gray in the department of Haute Saone. The Aedui at this time were hostile, and that is the reason why Caesar was obliged to march per extremos Lingonum fines, that is, along the southern border of the Lingones. The Sequani were situated between the Saone, the Rhone and M. Jura; the first-named river separated them from the Lingones.
trinis castris] Nap. places these camps on the heights of Occey, Sacquenay and Montormentier, between Dijon and Langres, on the left bank of the Vingeanne, about 7 or 8 miles N.E. of Thil-Chatel. Vercingetorix thus commanded the routes leading to the three places at which the Saone could be crossed, viz. Gray, Pontailler and Chalons. Caesar's camp he considers to have been near Longcau, q or 10 miles S. of Langres.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIApraefectis equitum] it will be noticed that C. gives a familiar Roman designation to the officers of the Gallic cavalry, so too vin. 12.
ad reliqui temporis] ‘little advance was thereby made towards
securing peace and quiet for the future’.
'll	adorirentur] adoriantur might have been expected, as the present
tense is used throughout the reported speech of Vercingetorix. The imperfect presupposes some such word as imperabat ‘he bade them attack’.
confidat'] the clause is viewed as subordinate, otherwise Caesar might have written quod se magis futurum confidere. Cf. 39 provideat.
progredi modo] ‘so much as to advance outside of the line of
march .
perequitasset] =perequitaverit (fut. perf.) in oratio recta.
Chap. 67,
p. 35. i & primo agmine] ‘ in the van ’.
consistit] this, the reading of the inferior MSS, is preferable to constitit. The battle-field is placed by Nap. and Kampen near the village of Prauthoy, about 5 miles S. of Caesar’s former position.
videbantur] ‘were seen’, aciem constitui ‘the troops to be drawn up in order of batile’. acies is fighting order, agmen marching order.
ad insequendum tardabat] for the construction cf. 26 palus Romanos ad insequendum tardabat.
9 summum iugum] Montsaugeon. The river mentioned immediately afterwards is the Badin a small tributary of the Vingeanne.
perducuntur] this is, I think, better than producuntur, which is read by F., though on no good MS authority, but see B. C. I. 23.
18 Eporedorix] not the Eporedorix often mentioned in conjunction with Viridomarus. K.
Ciiap. 68.
21 Alesiam] ‘the site of Alesia is certain. It is Alise-Sainte-Reine on M. Auxois in the department of the Cote d’Or near Flavigny. If a man will approach Alise from the railway station Les Laumes on the line from Paris to Dijon, and if he has read Caesar’s description, he will recognise the place as soon as he sees it’. Long, Decline of the Roman Republic, IV. 335. So Heller, Kraner, Goler, Napoleon, etc.
impedimentis deductis] dative after praesidio. K.
proximum collem] probably some rising ground about 9 miles west of the battle-field.
27 altero die] Nap. argues that this must mean the second day after Caesar’s departure, for Alesia is about 40 miles from the battle-field and Caesar could hardly have accomplished this distance in a hilly country on the day following that of his departure, but von Kampen suggestsDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
with much probability that the actual move towards Alesia did not take place till the day after the battle, and ‘from the point where Napoleon supported by traces that have been discovered believes Caesar to have passed the night before the battle, Alesia could very well be reached in two days by forced marches’.
Chap. 69.
expugnari] ‘reduced’.
duo jlumitia\ the river Ose washes the north, and the Oserain the south side of the hill. They are both tributaries of the Brienne.
p. 36. i planities] the ‘plaine des Laumes’ lies W. and S.W. of Alesia. The Brienne flows through the middle of it in a S. E. direction.
mediocri interiecto spatio] spatium denotes the space between the hills in question and M. Auxois on which Alesia was situated. It was nearly one mile in width. The hills vary in height from 1300 to 1400 feet above the level of the sea.
4	quae pars collis... hunc omnem locum] notice the fulness of expression
for omnem partem collis quae. The W. corner of the hill was occupied by the town of Alesia; all the E. portion by the Gauls.
7 munitionis] the investment was effected by camps placed in favourable positions together with 23 castella (redoubts). The whole line of investment measured nearly 10 miles. The Roman camps are still clearly traceable, as also are five of the 23 castella.
Chap. 70.
instituto] ‘started’, ‘set on foot’. planitie] the plain of Les Laumes.
Germanos] German cavalry, cf. n. on 13.
angustioribus portis relidis] relinquere ‘to leave’ is not used here in the sense of ‘to quit’, but Caesar means that the spaces which they had ‘left’ for the gates in the maceria were too narrow. The Gallic cavalry had left their camp on the E. side of M. Auxois, and had engaged in a skirmish with the Roman cavalry in the plain of Les Laumes. Caesar, seeing his men hard pressed, had summoned the German cavalry to their aid, and thus reinforced the Romans had driven back the Gauls to their camp; but the gates in their stone wall were so narrow, that when the Gauls pursued by the Romans tried to re-enter their fortifications, they became completely blocked in the narrow entrances, and wrere cut down in great numbers.
23 pro vallo]=pro castris above, the Roman camp being always surrounded by a vallum. When Caesar ordered his legions to advance, the Gauls in their fortified post (intra munitiones) on M. Auxois were thrown into no less consternation (non minus, i.e. than those w’ho had just been defeated in the cavalry engagement), and some even attempted to force their way into Alesia itself, whereupon V. ordered
GoogleCapp. 68—72]	NOTES.	87
the town-gates (portas) which opened into the Gallic camp to be closed.
Chap. 71.
31	dimittere]	for the inf. after consilium capere cf. 26 consilium ceperunt
profugere.
31 adeat...cogant] for the change of number K. compares advolaret... possent 72.
sua in illos merita proponit] compare a former speech of Vercingetorix 20 haec% inquit, a me, Vercingetorix, beneficia habetis, etc.
p. 37. 3 milia hominum lxxx.] Mr Long says, ‘it is not credible that 80,000 men shut themselves up in Alesia’. The Due d’Aumale is also inclined to think the number too large. The whole extent of the plateau is said to be about 15,000,000 square feet, which would give nearly 190 sq. ft. to each man.
dierum xxx.] the Due d’Aumale is doubtless right in supposing that Alesia had been provisioned and fortified in anticipation of a siege before the arrival of Vercingetorix: otherwise it is not easy to see how the Gauls could have procured in the time so great a quantity of provisions as would suffice to keep 80,000 men for 30 days.
9	paruerint]	cf. V. 58 magna proponit iis qui regem occiderint praemia
and n. on 27.
recepit]	perhaps recipit should be read from the inferior MSS.
Chap. 72.
15 directis lateribus] ‘with perpendicular sides’; consequently the bottom {solum) of the ditch would be as wide as the top: cf. vm. 9 imperat fossam duplicem pedum quinum denum lateribus deprimi directis. This ditch appears only to have been dug across the Plaine des Laumes from the Ose to the Oscrain: recent excavations have brought the whole of it to view. The works hereafter described were carried the whole way round M. Auxois.
passus] the mss have pedes, but passus is necessary, distinct traces of these works having been discovered. The two words being denoted by abbreviations are easily confused in the mss.
id] the pronoun is used by a curious brevity of expression where one would have expected atque id fecit or something similar; perhaps it is merely a repetition of the last syllable of reduxit.
esset...cingeretur) the subjunctives are not dependent on quoniam, but are used because the clauses in which they occur express not so much an actual fact as Caesar’s own thoughts: ‘ since (as he reflected) he had of necessity’ etc. The corpus of the best ms is probably a blunder of the copyist for opus, his eye having caught the first syllable of the following word corona. In the next clause ne...advolaret etc. is explanatory of hoc consilio.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. Vll.
hoc intermisso spatio] abi. abs. spatium is the 400 paces mentioned above.
eadem altitudine] these words mean that the two ditches were of the same depth; what the depth was Caesar does not say, but the recent examination of the site has shown that it was about 8 or 0 feet.
interiorem] the one nearest Alesia, campestribus ac demissis locis ‘in the low-lying meadow-land’. The flumen from which Caesar filled the ditch appears to have been the Oserain.
post eas] ‘behind these’ and therefore beyond the outer of the two fosses, vallum is the palisading on the top of the agger, the two together were 12 feet.
loricam] a kind of breast-work or parapet called loricula viminea, vili. 9; cf. v. 40; Tac. Ann. iv. 49; Hist. IV. 37. Vegetius says obsidentes ultra iactum teli fossam faciunt eamque non solum vallo et sudibus sed etiam turriculis instruunt ut erumpentibus ex civitate possint obsistere; quod opus loriculam vocant, et saepe cum obsidio describitur invenitur in historiis lorica urbem esse circumdatam.
pinnas] pinnacles; ‘pieces of wood rising above the rest of the structure’, Mr Long, who translates loricam pinnasque *a crenelated parapet’. Apparently the lorica and pinnae were constructed on the top of the agger alongside of the palisade. On the inside of this structure, i.e. on the side facing the besieged town, a number of large stakes with branching ends were fixed in, so as to project (eminere) horizontally from where tne parapets were attached to the rampart (ad commissuras pluteorum atque aggeris). These stakes were called cervi ‘stags’ from their fancied resemblance to stag’s horns. For the plutei cf. n. on 25. A continuous row of these plutei composed the lorica.
Chap. 73.
;2 necesse] notice the twofold construction of necesse erat in the same sentence, (i) with the inf. of the deponent, necesse erat materiari et frumentari, ‘it was necessary to get timber’ etc.: (ii) with the acc. and inf. pass., nec. eiat tantas munitiones fieri, ‘it was necessary for so great works to be made’. To avoid this harsh change Schneider writes tueri for fieri.
>. 38.	3	4**°}	^or P0^’00	9U0	‘whereby’	before another ablative,
cf.*2 quo more eorum, and perhaps 26 quo timore.
4 aut] I have retained aut, which is rejected on inconclusive grounds by N. and K-; without aut the words will mean ‘trunks with very stout branches’. Hotoman wrote baud, so Forcellini even in 1862 (ed. Devit).
perpetuae] ‘continuous’, cf. 23, 57. Caesar does not say how many trenches there were, hue ‘into these’, cf. the use of eo in 58.
ab infimo revincti] ‘made fast at the bottom’, ab ramis eminebant
by Google‘stood out from their branches upwards’, i.e. showed only their branches above ground.
quini erant ordines] this may mean either (i) there were $ fossae with a row of cippi in each, or (ii) 5 rows of cippi in each fossa: so K.
acutissimis se vallis induebant] the valli are the sharp pointed branches of the cippi. Cippus properly means a block of wood or stone to mark a grave or a boundary.
ante quos] ‘in front of which i.e. on the side of the towm. obliquis ‘in transverse rows arranged in the form of a quincunx’, scrobes ‘wolf- pits’ (‘trous de loup\ Nap.).
12 paulatim angustiore) ‘with the sides gradually converging towards the bottom’.
feminis) femur is used as the nom. of this word; the cases may be formed from either of the stems femor- or femen-. R. § 454.
non amplius digitis quattuor] ‘not more than three inches’, digitus ‘finger’s-breadth’.
singuli ab inf mo solo pedes terra exculcabantur] ‘in each pit one foot from the bottom was stamped down with earth’, i.e. each of these pits, which were three feet deep, was filled to the height of one foot with earth firmly trodden down; the remaining two feet (reliqua pars) of the pit was covered over (integebatur not ‘filled up’) with rushes etc. to conceal the pitfall. I take the following from a short account of the campaign in the Birman Empire in the years 1824, 5: ‘the approach to the stockade was rendered very arduous ow'ing to its being bearded with small sharp bristles of bamboo, stuck in the earth, and sloping outwards and so arranged as not to be easily visible, being concealed by the herbage’.
18 huius generis) ‘of pits such as these there were set 8 rows at 3 feet distance from each other’.
taleae]	blocks of wood with iron hooks fastened in them; these
blocks w ere buried in the ground in such a way that the hooks projected above the surface. The soldiers called them ‘spurs’ or ‘caltrops’. Five of these stimuli have been found at Alesia, and of the wolf-pits more than fifty have been discovered ‘in such a perfect state of preservation that they appear as though they had been made but yesterday’. Nap.
Chap. 74.
23	secutus]	‘following’, ‘keeping to’.
diversas ab his] ‘fronting a different way from the others’. The works previously described formed Caesar’s lines of countervallation; those now mentioned were lines of circumvallation 13 miles in circuit to defend the besiegers from any army of relief that might be levied from the neighbouring states of Gaul.
27 eius discessu] there is no meaning in these words in their present position, and no satisfactory alteration has as yet been proposed.
30 habere convectum) cf. R. § 1402.
igitized by GOOgl0DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VII.
Chap. 75.
31	possent...statuunt] for the change of tense cf. n. on 9 priusquam
posset.
p. 39. * cuique] dat. after imperandum. With cuique supply principum. Three inferior mss have cuique civitati.
1 frumentandi rationem habere] ‘ organise the supplies \
Aeduis etc.] for the Aedui cf. 5, for the Segusiavi 64, for the Aulerci Brannovices and Cadurci 4, for the Arverni 3, for the Gabali 7. The Ambarri or Aedui Ambarri (1. 11) occupied the right bank of the Rhone in the department of Aix: the Brannovii may still survive in Blanot in Sa6ne et Loire. Eleatetis is probably incorrect; Nap. suggests Eleu- theris Cadurcis. The Velavi have left a trace of their name in Velay in Haute Loire.
7 Sequanis etc.] for the Sequani cf. 66; for the Senones, Lemovices, Pictones, Turoni, Parisii 4; for the Bituriges and Ruteni 5; for the Carnutes 2; for the Bellovaci 59. The Santones dwelt N. of the Garonne and have given their name to the province of Saintonge and the town of Saintes, formerly Mediolanum. The Helvetii were a powerful Keltic tribe between the Rhone, the Rhine, the lake of Geneva and M. Jura.
Ambianis etc.] the chief town of the Ambiani was Samarobriva, afterwards called Ambiani, now Amiens. The Mediomatrici dwelt E. of the Remi, S. of the Treveri; their chief town Divodurum, afterwards called Mettis, is now Metz. The Petrocorii occupied the modern Peri- gord; their chief town was Vesunna, now Perigueux. The Nervii, a powerful tribe of Belgic Gauls, inhabited a part of Hainault and Flanders between the Sambre and the Schelde: their chief town was Bagacum, now Bavay. The Morini dwelt in N. Picardy, cf. Verg. Aen. VIII. 727 extremique hominum Morini. For the Nitiobroges cf. 7; for the Aul. Cenomani 4.
12 Atrebatibus etc.] their chief town was Nemetocenna, now Arras, in Artois. The Veliocasses perhaps left a trace of their name in Vexin; their principal town was Rotomagus, now Rouen. The Lexovii gave their name to Lisieux, once Noviomagus, in Normandy. For the Aul. Eburovices cf. 4. The Raurici Avere situated between the Vosges and the bend of the Rhine at Basle. For the Boii cf. 9.
Aremoricae]	the tribes inhabiting the country corresponding to the
modern Bretagne and Normandy between the Loire and the Seine were called by this name, which is said to mean ‘dwellers on the sea-coast’. Cf. Ausonius Ep. ix. 35 sunt et Aremorici qui laudent ostrea ponti. The names of the Curiosolites, Redones, Ambibarii, Caletes, Nannetes stili survive in Corseult, Rennes, Ambi£res (?), Caux, and Nantes (formerly Condivincum). The Osismi had their habitation in the N.W, corner of Bretagne, the Venelli in the N.W. of Normandy.
Lemovices] it will be noticed that this tribe is mentioned for the second time. Desjardins would like to substitute the Nannetes. There is some trace of Veneti in the MSS.Capp. 75—77]
19	dicebant] R. § 1746 has dicerent after two MSS.
35	universae Galliae] Desj. II. 5 (note) points out that Caesar exaggerates
here, for no Aquitanian tribe sent contingents nor did several of the Belgic communities.
Chap. 76.
31 Commit] Caesar had made him king of the Atrebates. Cf. iv. 31 foil.
ipsi] Commius. The Morini were to be stipendiarii of Commius.
belli] perhaps belli in such phrases as this was originally a locative = ‘in war’. Liv. 1. 36 belli domique. Cf. the expression victor belli in Statius Theb. IX. 634.
31	inibatur] ‘was calculated*. Cf. Liv. XXXVIII. 33 numerus interfec
torum haud facile iniri potuit; and above 71 ratione inita.
33 consobrino] ‘cousin’, consobrini (for consororini) are properly the children of sisters.
p. 40. i quorum] — ut eorum, hence the subjunctive. For the tense of administraretur cf. 75 qui possent...statuunt,
ad Alesiam] ‘towards Alesia’.
aspectum modo] ‘the bare sight*.
ancipiti proelio] K. qu. I. 36 ita ancipiti proelio diu atque acriter pugnatum. anceps proelium is a battle in which the enemy attacks on two sides.
cum ex oppido etc.] in Greek this clause and the next foris tantae etc. would be distinguished by \Uv and thus, Ik flip rijs iro\ews...££a> 51.
Chap. 77.
censebat] Caesar says that part of the sententiae voted for a sortie; he
means part of the people who expressed the sententiae. So B. C. 11. 30. The clause dum vires suppeterent is quoted by Roby, § 1756, as an instance of a reported temporal clause.
15 magnae habitus auctoritatis] cf. Kenn. § 168.
ad consilium] ‘to give their advice’. All the best mss have concilium.
residere videtur] * still seems to dwell ’. Cf. Mr Long’s note on residere.
animi est, etc.] ‘that is softness of mind on your part (ista)t not valour, to be unable to bear want for a little time’. A similar idea is found in 30 cut rci (a pitched battle) propter animi mollitiem studere omnes videret, quod diutius laborem ferre non possent. Animi est ista mollitia—istud est animi mollitia.
35 dignitas] ‘the worth or authority of those who have given this opinion ’. K.
Digitized by GOO^lC92	DE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. VII.
7 7 quid] join quid animi ‘what feelings*. For the separation of quid from its dependent genitive cf. 36 quid in quoque esset animi: in I. 34 between quid and negotii 12 words intervene, propinquis consanguineisque nostris is dat. after fore.
p. 41. 3 animi causa] ‘for the sake of amusement*. Cf. V. 11 animi voluptatisque causa; Cic. p. Rose. Am. 134 animi et aurium causa. The best MSS have situ causa.
si illorum nuntiis] ‘if you cannot be assured by messengers from them (the Gauls) when every approach is guarded, take these (the Romans) as witnesses that their (the Gauls’) arrival is at hand
7 quid mei consilii est] lit. ‘what is of my counsel ’ — ‘ what is my counsel this is a species of the partitive genitive, cf. Draeger Hist. Synt. §199, 1 a. Roby §1282, Caesar B. G. I. ai quid sui consilii sit ostendit.
quid illi simile bello fuit] ‘ what similarity had that war (to this)?*
Cimbri\ for the position of this word K. cf. 81 Galli.
18 fama nobiles potentesque bello\ this is an instance of the grammatical figure called chiasmus, cf. Kenn. Appendix F.
a 1 ulla] to be joined with bella.
securibus'] the axes carried by the Roman lictors. The word is used to denote the sovereign power of Rome, as in Hor. Carm. Sec. 53 iatn mari terraque manus potentes Medus Albanasque timet secures. Prop. V. i. 45 Brutique secures.
Chap. 78.
qui inutiles sunt] the indie, in a sentence of this kind is unusual. K. refers to V. n, scribit, ut iis legionibus, quae sunt apud eum, naves instituat, cf. Kenn. § 193.
27 experiantur] the subject of this verb is of course not ii but the same as the subject of constituunt. For descendant cf. n. on 33.
subeundam condicionem] * submit to terms of surrender or peace’.
Mandubii] Alesia, it will be remembered, was a town of the Mandubii.
p. 42. i recipi prohibebat] ‘the necessary conclusion is that these unfortunate people died of hunger in the sight of both armies’. L.
Chap. 79.
4 colle exteriore] according to Nap. this is the hill of Mussey-la-Fosse, which forms the S.W. boundary of the plain of Les Laumes.
non longius] this, the reading of two inferior MSS, is approved by H. and K. F. reads longe mille passibus (without non), so in vni. 36 he has a millibus longe XII. All the best mss have non longe, which makes no good sense.
13	proximam fossam]	this was the first of the three fosses which the
Romans had made. Its width was 20 feet; cf. 72. integunt ‘ cover over’.
igitized by GOOgleChap. 80.
*6 ad utramque partem munitionum] i.e. at the lines of circumvallation and countervallation.
17	teneat] if the subordinate clause depends on a perf. participle which
itself belongs to a principal clause with present tense {in bet), the present subj. may be used as well as the more usual imperf. subj. Cf. 40 adhortatus...per moveantur but in 53 confirmatis militibus, ne permoverentur... reduxit. (From K.)
*1	pugnae proventum] cf. n. on 29.
P. 43.	3 usque ad castra] F. following the best MSS has usque in castra,
but the Romans could hardly have penetrated the enemies’ camp.
sui colligendi] for this construction see my note on v. 38.
ab Alesia processerant] lit. ‘had gone forth away from Alesia*. The sense would have been slightly different without ab. Cf. Verg. Aen. XII.
2 procedunt castris.
Chap. 81.
7 hoc spatio] ‘during this interval’. For the position of the nom. Galli cf. 77 depopulata Gallia Cimbri magnaque inlata calamitate.
harpagonum] the meaning of harpago is shown by Curt. IV. 2, ferreae manus (harpagonas vocant) quas operibus hostium iniccrent praeparabantur. Pliny vil. 57, 17 says harpagonas et manus invenit Pericles Atheniensis. The Carthaginians used a somewhat similar kind of instrument for grappling the Roman ships, Liv. xxx. 10, cf. Cacs. B. C. I- 57-
9 campestres munitiones] that part of the Roman lines which was in the plain of Les Laumes.
10 qua significatione) — ut ea signify hence the mood of possent; for the tense cf. n. on 80.
educit] sc. cos to be supplied from suis.
ut superioribus diebus, ///] F. leaves out the first ut, taking sup. dieb. with the following clause: N., L., K. rightly retain it.
fundis librilibus] K., I think wrongly, takes these words together and explains them as —fundis quibus lapides libriles iaciebantur. Librilia are said by Festus to be instrumenta bellica saxa scilicet ad bracchii crassitudinem in morem flagellorum loris revincta.
ac glandibus Gallos] so K. glandes are leaden acom-shaped bullets thrown from a sling. Ovid Met. VII. 776 compares the speed of the hound Laelaps to the flight of excussae contorto verbere glandes. F. reads Gallos grandibus (without ac), referring the adjective to sudibus.
Chap. 82.
stimulis] cf. 73 end: for induebant cf. 73, quo qui intraverant se ipsi
acutissimis vallis induebant.
Digitized by GOOglC94	DE	BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII.
transfodiebantur]	‘ were impaled’.
a7	pilis muralibus]	the pila muralia were no doubt larger than the
ordinary pilum. Mr Long thinks they were only used to thrust with.
ex superioribus castris] Caesar probably means the Roman camp on Flavigny S.E. of Alesia.
interiores'] the besieged Gauls: Caesar has hitherto been describing an attack upon the Roman lines by the Gallic army of relief. By priores fossas are meant the two inner fosses; it will be remembered that there were three altogether, cf. 72. The result of this unsuccessful attempt of the Gauls shows Caesar’s wisdom in constructing so many lines of defence; had the Gauls in Alesia been able to advance up to the outer munitio which was being attacked from outside by their fellow-countrymen, the two forces by a simultaneous assault would probably have broken through the lines and inflicted a serious defeat on the Romans.
Chap. 83.
p, 44. 4 adhibent] more usually in or ad consilium adhibere as in 77.
5 erat a septentrionibus collis] Nap. with whom Kampen agrees, thinks this is M. R^a N.W. of Alesia (cf. last chapter): G., less probably, takes it to be the high ground between the villages of Gresigny and Darcey, to the N. E. of Alesia.
12 virtutis opinionem] ‘reputation for valour*, quid quoque etc., ‘they decide secretly among themselves on the plans they propose to adopt, and on the method of their execution*; lor the form of the sentence cf. 85 quid quaque ex parte.
15 ex quattuor ducibus] cf. c. 76.
Chap. 84.
24 cratis] all the MSS have castris, one or two a castris; the latter is retained by L., but surely a castris proferre is an impossible construction (cf. B. C. II. 22 arma tormentaque ex oppido proferunt). The word egreditur apparently led the copyist to substitute castris for cratis.
musculos] Vegetius, IV. 16, says musculos dicunt minores machinas quibus protecti bellatores sudatum (palisade) auferunt civitatis ; fossatum diam apportatis lapidibus lignis ac terra non solum complent sed etiam solidant ut turres ambulatoriae sine impedimento iungantur ad murum. The musculi were chiefly used in repentinae oppugnationes B. C. III. 80; cf. also B. C. II. 10, where Caesar describes the construction of a musculus 60 ft. in length. ‘ It was a strong piece of woodwork. The base was quadrangular; at each angle was a strong pillar; the pillars supported a two-sided roof sloping each way from a ridge. Under this the soldiers worked, and made holes in the wall of a besieged city’. Long. For the fakes cf. n. on 22.
qui post tergum] ‘which rose behind them as they were fighting*. pugnantibus is dative.
suum periculum] i.e. they see that their own escape from peril depends on the safety of others.Chap. 85.
32	Caesar] it is supposed that Caesar placed himself on the hill of
Flavigny, which commands a view of the plain of Les Laumes.
p. 45. i submittit] notice the omission of auxilium.
ad animum occurrit] an unusual phrase. Forcellini wrongly explains ad animum as — ad animum addendum. F. reads id animo.
3 de omni salute desperant] * despair of safety altogether*.
iniquum loci ad declivitatem fastigium] lit. ‘the unfavourable downward inclination of the ground exercises great influence*.
8 testudine facta] this military manoeuvre is described by Livy xxxiv. 39 sublatis deinde supra capita scutis continuatisque ita inter se ut non modo ad caecos ictus sed ne ad inserendum quidem ex propinquo telum loci quicquam esset testudine facta subibant, cf. S.D.A. ‘testudo’
10	ea quae occultaverant] such as the lilia, stimuli, etc.
Chap. 80.
Labienum\ Nap. supposes that Labienus was posted on the hill of Bussy-le-Grand, N.E. of Alesia, but Kampen’s map places his camp near Caesar’s on M. Flavigny.
sustinere\ ‘hold his ground*, ded. cohort, ‘to draw off his troops and make a sortie’, i.e. to sally out of the outer lines and attack the besieging army.
interiores] the Gauls within the Roman lines, cf. 82.
exscensu] so Madvig Adv. 11. 259 for ex ascensu.
propugnantes] ‘their defenders’. ‘propugno proprie est pugno defendendi gratia ’.
Chap. 87.
25	pugnaretur] for the tense cf. n. on 9 priusquam posset.
postquam..poteran/] ‘the imperfect denotes an abiding state*. K., who quotes B. C. m. 60 where tne perf. visum est and the imp. dabatur are found in the same sentence after postqtiam. Tr. ‘when the earthworks now proved unable*.
una XL.] F. has undequadraginta. Vielhaber thinking XL. too large a number proposes to read XI. A similar mistake in figures is supposed by some to have been made in B. C. II. 10, where for i.X. Lipsius would read IX.
fors obtulit] ‘chance threw them in his way*. Fors is the opposite of ratio ‘design’, cf. Hor. Scrm. I. 1. 2, seu ratio dederit seu fors obiccerit. Caesar has expressed himself so obscurely that one cannot gather whether Labienus himself removed these cohorts from the nearest praesidia (‘ Labienus got together 39 cohorts which he was fortunately able to draw from the nearest forts’. Long, who reads undequadraginta), or whether he made use of them on happening to fall in with them after they had been drawn from the guard-houses by some other officer.
Digitized by GOO^lCDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VII
Chap. 88.
p. 48. i ex eoiore vestitus] Caesar wore the scarlet paludamentum appropriated to the imperator. Cf. S.D.A. ‘paludamentum *.
3 haec declivia et devexa] ‘the descending slopes’, apparently the sloping ground leading from the hill of Flavigny, whence Caesar came (cf. 85) to the plain. Then loca superiora must mean the high ground about M. Rea occupied by the enemy. Nipperdey unnecessarily altered hostes to nostri.
excipit] ‘takes up’; the object eum may be supplied from the abl. abs. K. however points out that excipere may be used intransitively; ‘follows immediately’.
rem geruni\ ‘set to work’. K. qu. Sail. Cat. 60 pila omittunt, gladiis res geritur.
8 appropinquant] the best mss have appropinquabant and in the next sentence verterunt.
Chap. 89.
71	necessitatium] nouns of this class with consonantal stems usually
make the genitive plural in -um, but a few nouns form exceptions to the rule, cf. R. § 445: civitatium is always found in Livy, sometimes in Cicero. Kenn. § 24.
si posset] ‘in the hope that he might be able’.
toto exercitui] the dative toto also occurs in VIII. 34. Cf. R. § 372. Prop. iv. x. 27. The phrase praedae nomine is found again in vm. 4. ‘The soldier would get the value of his man by selling him to the dealers who followed the camp ’. Long.
Chap. 90.
p. 47. 6 in Rem is] it will be remembered that the Remi were on terms of friendship with the Romans. Cf. 63.
Matiscone] Ma$on on the Saone.
Bibracte] Caesar was obliged to leave Bibracte again on Dec. 31, in consequence of a fresh rising of the Gauls. Cf. Vin. 2.
litteris] this w*ord should perhaps be struck out: if it is retained the sense must be ‘when these things were known at Rome by a despatch’.
dierum XX. supplicatio] ‘a public thanksgiving for 20 days’. Cf. iv. 38, where we read that a supplicatio of the same length was granted to Caesar. In II. 15 Caesar says that he had been allowed a supplicatio of 1«; days, adding with pardonable pride quod ante id tempus accidit nulli. Cf. S-'D.A. ‘ supplicatio’.
redditur] for this Schneider needlessly proposed editur. Tr. ‘is returned’, as we say ‘to return thanks’.