ea hieme qui fuit annus] the relative is attracted into the gender of the defining substantive (annus): R. § 1068. For a sentence of somewhat similar construction cf. 29 accidit ut esset luna plena qui dies consuevit, etc.
Gneo Pompeio'] this was the second occasion on which they held office together, the first being in 70 B.c. It had been arranged at the conference of Luca in April 56 at which Caesar was present that they should hold the consulship for 55.
Usipetes et Tencteri] Plutarch calls them Ovotnai and TevrepiTCu. For their previous history cf. 4. Napoleon thinks it probable that they crossed the Rhine near Xanten not far from the confluence of the Lippe with the Rhine: Goler places the crossing lower down in the neighbourhood of Emmerich.
quo] ‘whither* i.e. ‘into which*. Cf. eo ‘thereon* vii. 58 eo militibus iniectis.
bello] this must be taken with premebantur.
Sueborum gens] the spelling Suebi has more authority than Suevi. The exact limits occupied by the Suebi cannot now be determined; they may be placed roughly between lat. 48° and 510 N. and long. 8° and 120 E. Pliny speaks of them as a subdivision of the Hermiones or Herminones who occupied central Germany: cf. Tac. Germ. 2, 38, 39.
centum pagos] cf. 1. 37. pagus ‘district’, of undefined extent, French ‘pays’. Hence comes the word ‘pagan* first applied at a time when Christianity was chiefly confined to the towns of the Roman Empire. So the Teutonic races called the unconverted ‘heathen*, i.c. men of the heath. The Helvetii were distributed into 4 pagi I. 12.
hi rursus] Caesar does not express himself very clearly, but as he has
just said that every year each pagus sent out 1000 armed men he seem9
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA50	DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. IV.
to imply that the reliqui who stayed at home comprised at least 1000 able-bodied fighting men in addition to women children and men incapacitated for active service, and consequently that each pagus could put into the field about 2000 armed men and the whole state 200000. If this is correct, and if we are at liberty to gather from I. 29 that the 4 Helvetic pagi could furnish from 60000 to 70000 fighting men, we must conclude that the Helvetic pagus was about seven or eight times as populous as the Suebic
ratio atque usus] Caesar says there are two things which go on without interruption (i) agricultura (ii) ratio atque usus belli: one must be careful not to take ratio and usus as if they were two distinct and separate ideas; had Caesar intended the three nouns agricultura, ratio, usus, to be distinct and coordinate, he would have put neque before usus and not atque the employment of which shows that ratio and usus are meant to form as it were one notion ‘experience theoretical and practical’. The difference between ratio and usus is clearly seen in Cic. de Orat. HI. 80 qui ad eam rationem (theory) adiungat hunc usum (\)ia.c.\\G,z)exercitaiionemquedicendi: qu. by Nagelsbach Lat. Stilistik § 63 4.
neque longius anno] Schneider qu. Horace Carm. ill. 24 11 rigidi Getae
I immetata quibus iugera liberas | fruges et Cererem ferunt | nec cultura placet longior annua, \ defunctumque laboribus | aequali recreat sorte vicarius.
lacte atque pecore vivunt] Appian informs us that when other sustenance
failed the Germans ate grass. He also says they were KaraQpoyrjTal Oaydrov bt £\ttL5a dvaftiuxjeojs.
multumque sunt] ‘they are much given to the chase , cf. Sallust lug. 96 in operibus in agmine atque ad vigilias multum adesse.
18 quod.. faciant] all the mss agree in quod; Kr. writes cum to avoid the unusual syntax quodfaciant when there is no apparent reason for the subjunctive: perhaps one may suggest that the sentence receives an almost imperceptible oblique turn from the dicuntur at the beginning of this description of the Suebi.
a pueris] ‘ from boyhood ’; in Greek iic iralbwv, an expression which is more closely imitated by Cicero in his speech pro Archia poeta 4 ut primum ex pueris excessit A rchias.
nullo...assuefacti] translate freely ‘trained in no systematic performance of duty’. The dative is also used with assuefacere: see Exx. in R. §§ 1215, 1216. •
immani...effic it]	‘produces men of (endued with) vast stature’: magni-
tudine is the ablative of description or characteristic quality, R. § 1232.
Page 2.
locis frigidissimis] ‘though the regions they inhabit are very cold’ ablative of attendant circumstances, almost an ablative absolute. R. § 1240.
neque...et] so in Greek oure is often followed by re cf. Thuk. II. 1 iy <£ oure tTrep.(yvvvTQ Trap dW^Xovs Karaordyres re ivoXi/xovy.
Digitized by	)OlPhabcreni] the perfect adduxerunt is followed by an imperfect subjunctive in the subordinate clause. Sometimes the perfect is followed by a present when the present abiding result of the past act has to be brought into prominence, e.g. effecit ut liber sim. Below I have followed Kraner in writing lavarentur for the lavantur of the mss which Schneider is inclined to take as the subjunctive from lavere but this verb does not seem to be much used in prose.
quicquam] notice the emphatic position of this word at the end of the clause.
Chap. 2.
magis eo ut] the order is magis eo ut rather in order that habeant quibus vendant quae bello ceperint they may have persons to whom they may sell what they have taken in war, quam quo than for the reason that.
impenso pretio] ‘at a high price*. Horace Sat. II. 3. 245 has impenso without pretio: luscinias soliti impenso prandere coemptas.
importatis] some mss insert his after importatis.
prava atque deformia] pravus ‘ill-shaped’, almost the same as de- formis, only pravus denotes rather the want of symmetry in itself, deformis its appearance to the eye. A few mss have parva.
summi ut sint laboris] gen. of quality, cf. Horace’s magni formica laboris.
ex equis desiliunt] Vergil Aen. XI. 499 has ab equo desilire.
ephippiis] a Greek word transferred to Latin, cf. S. D. A. Ephippium.
omnino non sinunt] ‘they altogether forbid’. Caesar gives a similar account of the Nervii il i 5.
remollescere] this word is not quoted from any other prose author.
Chap. 3.
publice] Caesar has been speaking of their individual habits and social customs; he now passes to a feature of their public policy. Tr. ‘in state matters ’.
civitatum] this form of the genitive is supported by the authority of the best mss. Livy always writes civitatium: cf. Kenn. § 24, R. § 445 and Caes. B. G. vii. 89 note.
una ex parte] One would think that this meant to the Eastward, and so Napoleon understands it, but Kraner says the district between the Danube, Neckar,' Rhine and Main. It is difficult to believe that the Suebi had extended their ravages so far as to leave the land ‘desolate and without inhabitant’ for a distance of 600 miles from their borders. agri is nom. pi.
Ubii] the district occupied by the Ubii extended along the right bank of the RJiine, roughly speaking, from Muhlheim to Wiesbaden. Caesar says that owing to their wars with the Suebi they had lost much of theii former power, fuit ‘was once’, and is no longer: for this use offui cf. the well-known fuimus Troes, fuit Ilium et ingens Troia.
Digitized by GoOglC52	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm. IV.
ut est captus Germanorum] ‘according to the capacity of the Germans* i.e. as far as the Germans are capable of prosperity. Cic. Tusc. 11. 65 Graeci homines non satis animosi, prudentes, ut est captus hominum, satis> hostem aspicere non possunt: i. e. prudent, so far as the Greeks (hominum refers to Graecorum and does not mean mankind generally) can be prudent : cf. also Terence Ad. 480 Geta ut captus est servorum, non malus neque iners. In VI. 10 Caesar calls the Ubii barbari atque imperiti homines: though more cultivated than the rest of the Germans they were still barbarians.
et paulo sunt] I have printed Kraner’s reading of this passage though I feel sure that it is wrong. It is evident from a comparison of the various mss readings that there was originally a word between paulo and sunt and another between generis and ceteris. I would suggest the following et paulo, quanquam sunt eiusdem generis, sunt ceteris humaniores ; this is a nearer approach to the reading of the MSS than is given by any other conjecture that 1 have seen. The repetition of sunt would not be harsher than that of est in I. 16 sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est.
multis saepe bellis] for the position of saepe cf. 5 de summis saepe rebus.
civitatis] the state of the Ubii, gen. after gravitatem: so finibus are the territories of the Ubii.
redegerunt] for this use of redigere almost in sense of reddere Kr. qu. II. 27 quae facilia ex difficillimis animi magnitudo redegerat. This usage is not noticed in Forcellini.
Chap. 4.
in eadem causa] ‘ in the same state ’ or ‘case \ For this use of causa the student should consult Madvig on Cic. Fin. I 49.
Usipetes et Tencteri] these two tribes are usually mentioned together, cf. Tac. Germ. 32 where the former are called Usipi though in An. 1. 51 the form Usipetes is used. They occupied the right bank of the Rhine to the north of the Lippe. The district from which they were driven by the Suebi was probably the present kingdom of Saxony.
Page 3.
2 Menapii] this people inhabited a district corresponding more or less closely to North Brabant, their territory extending, as we learn from this passage, to the right bank of the Rhine.
cis Rhenum] ‘ on this side the Rhine ’ i. e. of course on the left bank, that being the nearest side to the Romans in Gaul. Below we find citra Rhenum in the same sense. The words cis and citra both mean literally ‘more here’, being compounded of the particle ce ‘here* with different comparative suffixes. Corssen 11. 600.
transire prohibebant] Caesar always uses the infinitive after prohibere; the author of the eighth book of the Gallic war once has prohibere quominus Vili. 34. The same construction is also found in Livy once, who also has proh. quin and proh. ne as well as the simple infinitive (from Drager Hist Synt. 11. 331).
10 tridui] gen. after viam cf. 11 tridui spatium; 1. 38 cum tridui viam processisset.




































DE BELLO GALLICO,,	[Comm. IV.
Page 4.
ab Rheno discederent] 'should quit the neighbourhood of the Rhine’. Cf. vil. 43 ab Gergovia discederet. R. § 1259.
quae postulassent] — fut. perf. quae postulaverint in oratio recta, ab se not ‘by them’ but ‘on their side’ cf. Liv. xxi. 13 postquam nec ab Romanis vobis ulla est spes ‘from the side of the Romans’, nearly similar is the use of ab in such expressions as ab re frumentaria laborare vn. 10 ‘in the matter of the corn supply*. Tr. here ‘and that all demands that they should make would be readily complied with on their part ’.
qua spe adducti] ‘by the hope of which*. On the analogy of such an expression as this we may gather that in quo metu perterriti vil. 26, quo metu perculsae Liv. xxi. 3, quo agrees with the noun and is not to be taken separately = ‘whereby*.
Eburonum et Condrusorum] the Eburones and Condrusi are called Germans in II. 4. The home of the former is to be found W. of the Rhine and N. of Aix la Chapelle, that of the latter S. of the same town. The Treveri, a powerful tribe, whose clients they were, gave their name to Tr&ves originally Augusta Treverorum. They affected a German origin, Tac. Germ. 28, cf. B. G. vm. 25, but were probably Keltic Gauls (Napoleon says they were Belgae). It is thought by Goler and others that qui only refers to the Condrusi and that the Eburones were not clients of the Treveri, but the opinion rests on inconclusive grounds.
Chap. 7.
in ea loca...quibus in locis] this redundancy of expression is not infrequent in Caesar. Cf. I. 6 erant omnino itinera duo quibus itineribus; IV. 19 and elsewhere.
to audiebat] not quite the same as audivit; the imperfect is here slightly frequentative; Caesar was probably told by more than one of the position of the Germans.
a quibus] Kraner says that quibus refers to loca, his to Germanos.
recusare...quin contendant] Caesar also has the infinitive after recusare,
III. 22 neque repertus est quisquam qui mori recusaret.
quicunque]	‘ to resist those who attack them Supply eis with resistere
as the antecedent to quicunque.
haec tamen dicere] in oratio recta haec tamen dicimus which if fully expressed in oratio obliqua would be haec tamen se dicere (dependent on aiunt or some such word understood), but the pronoun is sometimes omitted, cf. I. 17 where rogare= se rogare {aiunt).
velint] ‘wish for*.
possederint]	according to Kraner from possidlfre a verb recognized by
Weissenbom in Livy xxiv. 25, 45, xxxi. 31; perhaps Lucretius I. 386 is the only certain instance of its use.
concedere...possent] this sentence should be compared for two reasons with Tac. Agric. 15 nunc binos {reges) imponi e quibus legatus in sanguinem, procurator in bona saeviret, (i) the presents concedere and imponi
Digitized by GOOglCNOTES.
are followed by the imperfects possent and saeviret; in our passage possent may imply some such suppressed protasis as si cum iis contenderent; in Tacitus saeviret is used as if impositos esse had preceded, by a slight and not uncommon irregularity in the sequence of tenses; (ii) Tacitus might have written legatum...procuratorem..,+aevire; Caesar might have written deos...posse; each clause being made to depend on the principal verb ‘they say’ which conditions the oratio obliqua, instead of being regarded as a subordinate relative clause. For similar sentences cf. B. G. VII. 39 quod futurum provideat, 66 id quod magis futurum confidat. The syntax of these relative clauses in oratio obliqua seems to be scarcely noticed in grammars.
2i	neminem] notice the emphatic position of this word; quin might possibly have been used for quem non as in Cic. Verr. iv. i where quin — quam non but usually quin is only used for the nom. case of the relative + non. R. §§ 1680, 1688. To illustrate the defiant tone of this speech the commentators refer to the speeches of Divico I. 13, Ariovistus I. 36, and Vercingetorix vii. 29.
Chap. 8.
quae visum est] sc. respondere. The sed implies ‘it is not worth while to give the rest of Caesar’s speech, but the end of it was as follows ’.
24 remanerent] the imperfect is used and not the present because the tense is influenced by the leading verb dixit implied in exitus fuit orationis. The distinction may be simply illustrated thus:— dicit pater se dolere si filius mentiatur: dixit pater se dolere si filius mentiretur or mentiatur according as the perfect dixit is allowed to influence the sentence or not. Below we have possint where the perfect does not exert its influence.
veruni\ ‘fair’ ‘reasonable’.
Chap. 9.
post diem tertium] ‘on the third day after’. If the conference was on Monday they were to return on Wednesday.
propius se] prope is here a preposition governing the accusative.
Page 5.
Ambivaritos] on the left bank of the Meuse near Venlo.
Chap. 10.
Vosego] VosPgus, Fr. Vosges, Germ. Vogesen or Wassigen. Caesar evidently extends the term to include the Faucilles a range of hills connecting the Cote d’Or and the plateau de Langres with the Vosges proper. Langres is the ancient Andematunnum, afterwards called Lingones, the chief town of the Lingones. The reading of this
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. IV.
sentence as given in the text is that of the best mss, but is undoubtedly faulty ; the following alteration adopted by Kraner after Aldus is the best that has been proposed : d parte quadam ex Rheno recepta, quae appellator Vacalus, insulam efficit Batavorum, neque longius ab eo milibus passuum lxxx in oceanum influit: Nipperdey has the same with the exception of Rheno in place of eo.
parte quadam ex Rheno receptd\ ‘briefly put for parte quadam ex Rheno derivata recepta * Kr.; this is something like the so-called pregnant use of prepositions which is so common in Greek, e. g. irdvres ol Ik ro&rov tov rbirov ffvvepp&rjaav Xen. An. iv. 2. 19 ‘all who were in this place rushed together out 0/it*
Vacalus] the Waal. In Tac. An. 11. 6 it is called the Vahalis; the intermediate form Vachalis is quoted by Nipperdey from Apollonius Sid. xiii. 11; Aimoine a monk who lived in the 10th century adds vulgo dicitur Walis.
Batavoruni\ from bet-auw = * good meadow*: Lucan has Batavi, Juvenal, Silius, Martial Batavi. For an interesting account of the island and of its early history the student should read Motley, Dutch Republic, introd. § 2.
ab Oceano] Nipperdey writes ab Rheno, but ab eo (i. e. the Waal) is preferable. In consequence of the uncertainty ol the text we cannot now determine what two points Caesar intends to represent as 80 miles apart. If Kraner’s text be accepted Caesar is speaking of the distance from the junction of the Waal and the Meuse to the Ocean ; now it is possible that in Caesar’s time the Waal entered the Meuse not at Gorkum as at present but near Batenburg (cf. Mr Long's note) or at Fort St Andre, and this may be roughly estimated as 80 miles from the sea.
Rhenus] the name is said to be of Keltic origin and to mean ‘the runner’, cf. below citatus fertur. The Hinter-Rhein ‘issues from an aperture in shape resembling a cow’s mouth’ (Baedeker) in the Rheinwald or Zapport Glacier in the Grisons. Cf. however Tac. Germ. 1 Rhenus Radicarum Alpium inaccesso ac praecipiti vertice ortus modico flexu in occidentem versus septentrionali Oceano miscetur from which we may perhaps infer that the Vorder-Rhein was regarded as the main stream; this branch takes its rise in the Toma See on the NW. slope of the Six Madun ‘ a vast pyramid of rock ’ near Andermatt.
o	Nantuatium] it is not easy to reconcile this with III. 1 where Caesar
appears to place the Nantuates between the lake of Geneva and Mt Blanc. In the inscription quoted by Pliny ill. 20 from the trophy of Augustus enumerating the conquered Alpine tribes we find the following names among others : Leponli, Uberi, Nantuates, Seduni, Varagri. Here we notice at once that the Nantuates are mentioned between the Leponti {in whose domain Caesar says that the Rhine takes its rise) and the Seduni and Veragri; in B. G. III. 1 the order is Nantuates Veragros Sedunosque; in hi. 6 Servius Galba passes through the Nantuates on his way from Octodurus (Martigny ?) a town of the Veragri to the Allobroges. Schneider supposes that they inhabited a long strip of land extending in an easterly direction from the south bank of the lake of Geneva
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAto the source of the Rhine, and so the Nantuates of the present passage will be the same as the Nantuates of the 3rd book, though Caesar may not have had any very exact notion of the limits of their territory.
11	Helvetiorum]	the Helvetii a powerful Keltic tribe dwelt between
the lakes of Geneva and Constance. The Sequani occupied a considerable extent of country extending from the Saone and the Rhone as far as Strasbourg. The Mediomatrici may be placed between the department of the Meuse and the Rhine, their chief town was Divodurum afterwards called Mettis now Metz. The Triboci are classed as Germans by Tacitus Germ. 28. The name is said to be Keltic and to mean * dwellers on the hills*. According to Ptolemaeus one of their towns was Breucomagus now Brumt or Brumat between the Vosges and the Rhine, cf. B.G. I. 51. For the Treveri cf. 6.
sunt qui existimantur] one must not translate ‘ among whom there are some who are thought ’ because this would require existimentur, but * of whom are those who are thought*. Kr.
piscibus] cf. Motley, Rise of the Dutch Republic, introd. § 2.
capitibu:] caput is more often used of the source than of the mouth of a river. Ca esar is scarcely correct in speaking of multa capita, cf. Vergil’s Rhen.ts bicc.-nis.
Chap. 11
Caesar cum] in English these words would be transposed, ‘ when Caesar’: a similar order of words occurs again in v 22 ii cum ad castra venissent, vn. 17 quin etiam Caesar cum.
non amplius] when the envoys first met him Caesar was, we are told, a few days* march distant, 7; the envoys begged him not to advance nearer while they were gone to learn the will of their countrymen, a request which he refused to grant, and we accordingly find that he is now only at a distance of 12 miles after an interval of three days, 9 post diem tertium.
qui agmen antecessissent] the subjunctive is used because the clause
does not contain a mere statement of fact by the writer, but is a part of the speech of the legati which is given by Caesar in oratio obliqua, and all subordinate clauses in oratio obliqua have their verbs in the subjunctive.
jidem fecisset\ ‘should give thema solemn assurance*; for the tense cf. 6 quae postulassent; for the singular after principes ac senatus, the predicate being made to agree with the last of two (or more) subjects, Kr. compares II. 26 castra et legiones et imperator versaretur, cf. Cic. p. Sulla 22 et gladiatores et omnis ista vis comparabatur and several other passages from Cicero Livy Tacitus quoted by Drager Hist. Synt. 1. § 104.
ea condicione] the proposal offered by Caesar in 8: quae ferretur ‘ which was proposed’ or more literally * which was being proposed*.
eodem illo pertinere] ‘ C. thought that all this tended in that same direction’, eodem pertinere occursi. 14.
P. CAE.	5
Digitized by Google58	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm. IV.
non longius] Napoleon, who describes Caesar’s movements with almost as much precision as if he had been an officer in Caesar’s army, states that the river from which the Romans were going to get water could be no other than the Niers a small stream flowing through Gueldres and Goch (near to which he supposes the decisive battle to have been fought) and entering the Meuse near Gennep in North Brabant.
nuntiarent] the historic present mittit is virtually equivalent to a past tense and may therefore be followed by a past tense in the subordinate clause.
sustinerent'] ‘hold out’ cf. 32 suos aegre sustinere animadvertit. In oratio recta the sentence would be expressed thus si lacessemini (or lacessiti eritis)t sustinete, quoad {ox donec) ipse cum exercitu propius accessero (or accesserim).
Page 6, Chap. 12.
quorum erat] cf. 15 cum hostium numerus capitum CCCCXXX milium fuisset.
non amplius dccc equites] equites is the acc. after haberent, the word amplius having no influence upon the case. Cf. vil. 15 amplius xx urbes.
quod ii qui frumentandi] cf. 9.
6 indutiis] 1 a truce’ indutiae sunt pax castrensis paucorum dieimm, Varro, whose definition is foolishly criticised by A. Gellius I. 25. The word is ordinarily derived from indu an old form of in and the root of eo ‘go’ and therefore means ‘ingoing’, i.e. the opposing armies retire for a time into their respective camps.
8 subfossis] two MSS have subfossisque, but the omission of the copula between the two main verbs desiluerunt and coniecerunt in vivid narration is quite in Caesar’s manner.
11 desisterent] qu. by R. § 1696 as an instance of the consecutive use of the subjunctive; the flight is regarded as the natural result following on the perterritos egerunt, then the subjunctive desisterent necessitates the subjunctive venissent; cf. R. § 1778 for exx. of ‘subjunctive because dependent on another subjunctive’. If the sentence had been stated independently, i.e. without depending on the ut, it would have been written non prius fuga desistebant quam in conspectum agminis nostri venerant.
13 amplissimo genere natus] cf. VII. 37 amplissima familia nati adolescentes.
15	hic cum fratri] Caesar likes to record deeds of bravery and devotion
like this, whether performed by Romans or barbarians, cf. v. 44, vil. 25» 50 etc.
Chap. 13.
23 qui...intulissent] ‘when* or ‘since they had’ etc. qui is causal, hence the subjunctive.
ultro] ‘without provocation’.NOTES.
24	expect are dum. ..augerentur... reverteretur] the imperfects are due to
the principal verb of the sentence being in the imperfect tense iudicabat: otherwise the present subjunctive would naturally have been used after the present expectare as e. g. in Liv. vii. 40 expectate dum veniant.
infirmitate] cf. 5 infirmitatem Gallorum veritus.
auctoritatis] gen. after quantum from which as usual it is separated by several words.
legatis] Caesar had ro legati in Gaul. They were of Senatorial rank and were appointed by the Senate, subject to the wishes of the commander, to whom they were responsible though they sometimes acted independently. They appear to have had the rank of propraetor, cf. i. a 1 Titum Labienum legatum pro praetore. (From Kraner’s Einlei- tung.) The duties of the quaestor were chiefly financial; in I. 52, v. 24 we read that he was put in command of a legion.
ne quern] Kraner thinks that this clause is connected with consilio ‘his intention not to pass by’; it is equally probable that it should be taken to follow in sense on res accidit ‘a circumstance happened to prevent him from’ etc.; Schneider who understands the passage thus quotes for the order of the clauses VII. 32 id ne accidat, positum in eius diligentia and B. C. I. 19 id ne fieri posset, obsidione...fiebat, pugnae is gen. after diem.
opportunissime] I venture to retain this, the reading of all the best mss, in preference to the more obvious opportunissima.
postridie eius diei mane] ‘in the morning of the morrow of that day*. postridie is used with a dependent genitive as in I. 23 and elsewhere.
Page 7.
simul...simul] = afxa fxlv...dfxa S4, only here in Caesar, never in Cicero, Kr.: cf. Drager Hist. Synt. II. § 329.
quod...commisissent] ‘because, as they confessed, they had engaged’. I insert the words ‘as they confessed’, to explain the use of the subjunctive commisissent.
si quid] ‘to get whatever advantage they could in the matter of (about) the truce by deceitful representations ’.
quos] ‘Caesar delighted at their being put into his power’. For gavisus most MSS have gravius which is obviously wrong. It was thought by some at Rome that Caesar acted dishonourably in seizing these envoys; Cato bitterly denounced the deed and declared that Caesar ought to be given up to the Germans. Merivale, 1. 398.
Chap. 14,
7 acie tnplict instituta] acies is fighting, agmen marching order, hence we infer from the use of the word acies h^re that Caesar made his troops march in fighting order. Kraner explains the formation of the acies triplex thus: the legion marched in three parallel lines, the first line consisting of 4, the second and third of 3 cohorts (there being 10 cohorts in a legion); this was the usual formation on the battle-field and byDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. IV.
adopting it on the march the army was better prepared against a sudden attack by the enemy. Each cohort was preceded by its baggage; if an enemy appeared it was only necessary for the several cohorts to wheel to the right or left to allow all the baggage to pass to the rear.
9 possent] cf. note on 4 priusquam fieret.
discessu suorum] suorum probably includes the cavalry who were gone foraging across the Meuse as well as the chiefs and elders who were detained by Caesar.
r2	perturbantur, copiasne..praestaret] ‘are thrown into consternation
(not knowing) whether it were better* etc.
pristini diei] ‘the day before*.
-20 domo excesserant] cf. I. 12 domo exisset; the construction excedere ex which is common in Caesar as in other writers would perhaps be scarcely applicable with domo in the somewhat vague and general sense of ‘home’ that it bears here; ex domo excedere would rather mean to go out of some particular house or home. With this use of donio may be compared loco in such phrases as loco cedere, loco movere, which may be regarded almost as single words, cf. our ‘locomotion'.
Chap. 15.
ad confluentem Mosae et Rhcni] some critics have wished to substitute the Mosel for the Meuse. To the objection that Caesar has carefully described the course of the Meuse which he certainly would not have done had it been of no importance to his narrative, they reply that Chapter 10 is a late interpolation. Mr Long who expresses no doubt of the genuineness of 10 seems to think it possible that Caesar could describe the course of one important river, the Meuse, in 10, mention it again in 12, and then without a word of explanation apply the same name in 15 to another large river 100 miles off. Florus and Dion Cassius have been quoted in support of the Mosel, but Florus only says iterum de Germano Tencteri querebantur, hic vero iam Caesar ultro Mosellam navali ponte transgreditur ipsumque Rhenum et Hercyniis hostem quaei it in silvis I. 45 §14 (Halm): Dion Cassius says that the Tencteri and Usipetes rbv rCHr/vov bit^rjoav ical is rfy rwv Tpijovlpojv ivi(3a\ov. Florus says absolutely nothing about the site of the battle, and Dion may have been thinking of B. G. iv. 6 where Caesar says that the Germans got as far as the Condrusi who were the clients of the Treveri. A brief review of the hints already afforded us by Caesar’s narrative will be of use towards determining the question at issue. The Tencteri and Usipetes dwelt on the right bank of the Rhine north of the Lippe, that is, in North-East Westphalia and Guelderland. They crossed the Rhine and wintered among the Menapii whose domains corresponded roughly to North Brabant. Some of the Gallic tribes made overtures to them, md in 6 we read qua spe (the hope of acquisitions in Gaul) adducti Germani latius vagabantur et in fines Eburonum et Condrusorum qui sunt Treverorum clientes pervenerant; taking this passage in connexion with 12 where it is stated that they had sent a great part of their cavalry
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINNOTES.
on a foraging expedition among the Menapii on the left bank ot the Meuse, we naturally conclude that the Germans were still somewhere in the neighbourhood of the Meuse. Mr Long says that they had already advanced S. of Li&ge, for this he has no authority whatever: Caesar in the passage above quoted is doubtless speaking as Kraner suggests, not of the whole body of the Germans but of wandering predatory bands, and there is no need to suppose that even these had advanced farther S. than Aix la Chapelle which would be on the northern border of the Condrusi. Yet though every hint given by Caesar up to the present chapter points to the Meuse as the scene of hostilities, we are suddenly transferred by Goler and Mr Long to the Mayenfeld near Coblenz, and told that the Germans were encamped there, though the greater part of the cavalry, which must have formed no slight element of strength in these vast predatory hordes, was left about 100 miles away among the Ambivariti. In conclusion, though admitting the difficulties of the passage, I see no adequate reason either for suspecting the genuineness of the text or tor supposing that though Caesar said the Meuse he meant the Mosel.
confluentem Musae el Rheni\ does Caesar mean the confluence of the Waal (which he seems to regard as a part of the Rhine, cf. 10) with the Meuse, or the confluence of the Waal (regarded as a part of the Meuse) with the Rhine? Probably the former, and in that case it must be remembered that according to some authorities the Waal did not enter the Meuse in Caesar’s day at Gorkum, but either near Batenburg (cf. 10) or according to Napoleon near Fort Saint Andr& Heller understands the words to mean ‘ the stream connecting the Meuse and the Rhine,’ that is, the Waal, but admits that he can produce no other instance of confluens used in this sense (‘ Verbindungsstrom ’).
ex timore] the meaning of ex in such phrases as ex timore or ex fuga se recipere seems to waver between ‘after’ and ‘out of’ with an implied notion of ‘recovery from’, cf. note on vn. 20.
hostium numerus capitum] there is a similar instance of a double genitive with numerus in 12, so Liv. x. 36 captivorum numerus fuit septem milium octingentorum.
Page 8, Chap. 13.
iustissima] ‘the most cogent*.
impelli ut] according to Drager Hist. Synt. II. § 395 no instance of impellere followed by ut occurs before Cicero.
cum intellegerent] ‘when they should understand’, more freely ‘by making them understand’.
Sugambrorum] the Sugambri occupied the right bank of the Rhine between the Sieg and the Lippe.
qui postularent] ‘to demand that they should surrender to him those who had made war on him and on Gaul’, quos is of course the Sugambri, eos the German cavalry who had taken shelter with them.
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. IV.
14	cur...postularet]	‘why should he expect anything to be under (lit.
‘of’) his rule or authority’: imperii and potestatis are genitives after esse; cf. 5 est hoc Gallicae consuetudinis. The distinction here between imperium and potestas seems to be that the former is military, the latter civil authority.
quod...premerentur] ‘because, as they said, they were hard pressed’: cf. 13 quod commisissent.
occupationibus rei publicae] ‘business of state’.
21 ad auxilium] ad is not in the mss but seems required. It was first inserted by Aldus.
Ariovistopulso] ‘in consequence of the repulse of Ariovistus*. The
campaign against Ariovistus is narrated in I. 30—end.
Chap. 17.
The method pf construction of Caesar’s Rhine bridge seems to have been as follows:
Two piles, two feet apart and connected by crosspieces, were driven by means of pile-drivers into the bed of the river a short distance from the bank and in a line at right angles with the bank. They were fixed not vertically but in such a way as to slope in the direction of the current. Forty feet down the stream and exactly opposite the first pair, a similar pair of piles was driven in, sloping in the opposite direction, consequently against the current and leaning towards the first pair. These two couples were then connected by a stout transverse beam 40 (?) feet long ana 2 feet wide, a width which would just admit of its being fitted in at each end between the two piles (which it will be remembered were 2 feet apart) forming each couple. So far there is no great difficulty, but in the words binis utrimque fibulis etc. Caesar describes his method of strengthening the four bearing-piles with their transverse beams and his meaning has been variously explained. Kraner agrees with Heller in supposing that there were 8 fibulae altogether, 4 at each junction of the beam with the piles, but they differ as to their position. Kraner dis
poses them as in fig. 1, where however only 2 fibulae (d) are actually visible, the other pair being hidden by the bearing-pile (a). Heller
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINCapp. i6, 17]
places them as in fig. 2, thinking that they were driven horizontally through the beam, two on each side of the bearing piles.
Cohausen on the contrary believes that there were only 2 fibulae at each end, arranged as in fig. 3. It	pig. 3>
will be seen that here one of the fibulae serves instead of the crosspiece c in fig. 1 for the beam to rest on. In the article on Bridges in the Encyclopaedia Britannica will be found a diagram representing this bridge ® taken from Col. Emy’s Traite de l’art de la Charpenterie, in which the fibulae are arranged in a somewhat similar manner; and thus too Goler understands the passage.
Lastly, Napoleon takes an entirely different view of the fibulae, considering them to have been long beams arranged as in fig. 4, but his
explanation will not be generally accepted. A careful reader of Caesar’s narrative will, I think, be inclined to follow Heller or Kraner.
The structure above described would have to be repeated about 60 times at regular intervals across the stream, supposing the river to have had a width of 530 yards (which is its breadth at Bonn) and the interval between the several piers to have been from 8 to 10 yards, but on these points Caesar gives us no information. All was now ready for laying down the roadway, which was done by placing a row of timbers or planks (directa materia iniecta) from beam to beam, and over these a second layer of smaller joists (longurii) laid transversely to the last row. Finally the roadway was completed by a layer of fascines or hurdles of close
Digitized by Google64	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. |C0I*m. IV.
texture [crates). Without these latter the bridge seen from above would have some such appearance as in fig. 5.
Pig- 5-
CO ccccc ccc
The last important difficulty that we have to notice concerns the nature of the defensive timberwork constructed by Caesar on either side of the bridge. The following explanation seems on the whole the least open to objection. On the side of the bridge facing down-stream a stout pile was driven into the bed of the river over against each pier, against which it was made to slant, thus serving as an additional support to the bridge against the strength of the current. On the other side of the bridge and at a short distance from it detached piles were driven in obliquely, sloping against the stream; these would act as breakwaters and as defences against any vessels or timber floated down by the enemy with the object of destroying the bridge. There is a good model of this bridge, the work of a schoolboy, in the library of Trinity College.
neque suae] not consonant with his own dignity nor with that of the Roman people.
summa difficultas] ‘very great difficulty in the way of making a bridge was set before him’ or possibly as Kraner takes it ‘the difficulty that was set before him was very great
Page 9.
sesquipedalia] a foot and a half in thickness, tigna is timber hewn or sawn into shape.
paulum ab imo praeacuta] ‘sharpened off a little way from the end’; this seems to be rightly explained by Cohausen as meaning that they did not taper off to a point by a gradual attenuation, but by a sharp and abrupt convergence; cf. vii. 73 stipites ab summo praeacuti (without paulum). The piles of Roman bridges were often shod with iron: some have recently been found in the Neckar near Heidelberg; see a letter from Prof. Wilhelm Ihne in the Athenaeum of Nov. 16, 1878.
altitudinem] the average depth of the Rhine at Xanten is 18 feet, between Coblenz and Andernach 16 feet.cum...adegerat] cum is used with the pluperfect indicative of repeated actions, cf. III. 14, 15, v. 19, 35 (twice), vn. 22, B. C. I. 58. Drager Hist. Synt. 11. p. 538.
machinationibus] ‘rafts*, ‘pontoons’. They are still called * mas- chine’ on the continent (Goler).
flumen] two MSS have flumine.
fistucis] ‘pile-drivers’, ‘monkeys’; the word usually means a beetle or a paviour’s hammer. Cf. S. D. A. s.v.
sublicae] ‘pile*, hence was derived the name of the well-known pons sublicius said to have been built by Ancus Martius, Liv. 1. 33 id (the Ianiculum) non muro solum, sed etiam ob commoditatem itineris ponte sublicio, tum primum in Tiburi facto, coniungi urbi placuit.
directe] some MSS have directae, pronae> fastigatae.
7 intervallo pedum quadragenum] it is not clear whether Caesar reckons the 40 ft. from base to base of the piles, that is, along the river-bed, as Cohausen supposes, or from where the beam is fitted into the two couples of piles, which is the usual view; the objection to this is that 40 ft. is an unusual and unnecessary width for a bridge of this kind, the Roman bridges rarely exceeding 20 ft. in width. Kraner agrees with Cohausen that the space between the bases of the piles is meant,. the bridge itself then w6uld be probably about 25 ft. wide.
haec utraque] the two opposite couples of piles.
insuper] ‘ when beams two feet in width had been let in from above *.
fibulis] wooden bolts or pins: see above for the different interpretations of this passage.
distinebantur] ‘were kept apart*; it is hard to decide between this and destinabantur ‘were made fast’, the reading of one or two MSS.
quibus disclusis] does quibus agree with disclusis?	Heller takes
quibus to be the fibulae and disclusis etc. to refer to tigna, ‘by which the beams being kept apart* etc.; for a similar confusion of ablatives he quotes I. 10 compluribus eis praeliis pulsis. According to Napoleon quibus disclusis etc. refers to the two opposite couples which together form one section of the bridge: see above fig. 4. revinctis ‘made fast*, so in vii. 73.
haec] n. pi. it is used loosely of the whole framework of the bridge, piles and beams.
directa] ‘at right angles’, i.e. to the cross-beams, see above fig. 5. For this use of the word cf. vn. 23.
secius] it is difficult to decide between Corssen’s spelling setius connected with seg-nis and Fick’s secius connected with kcl ij<r<TO)v ( = 17x- yuv); the latter authority distinguishes this word from setius ‘tardily’ a sense found once or twice (Plaut. Cist. iv. 2. 24).
pro ariete] there is some uncertainty in the reading— aries is a prop or support; with the present passage cf. Cic. Top. 64 ex quo aries ille subicitur in vestris actionibus. It is not easy to see what meaning Mr Long attaches to pro ariete.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. IV.
mediocri spatio] this seems to mean at a short distance from the bridge, see the detailed description above. Cohausen thinks that the driving pile at this side was also made to lean as a shore against the piles of the bridge, but that it sloped at a more acute angle than those on the opposite side and may therefore be said to be some little distance away.
deiciendi operis] two MSS insert causa. Kr. qu. Liv. IX. 45 ut mitterent oratores pacis petendae amicitiaeque: cf. Liv. XXVII. 9, Tac. An. 11. 59, R. pref. vol. 11. p. lxvii. and § 1288. ‘Vessels for (of) destroying the work’.
his defensoribus] ‘with these to defend it*.
neu] ‘and that they might not injure the bridge*. neu=*and that not’; beware of translating it as if it were simply equivalent to ne ‘lest’.
Chap. 18.
diebus decem] ablative of ‘time in the course of which* something happens, R. § 1182; cf. v. 26 diebus circiter quindecim quibus in hiberna ventum est initium tumultus ortum est. Cic. p. Rose. Am. 20 quatriduo, quo haec gesta sunt, res ad Chrysogonum defertur.
materia coepta erat] other exx. of this passive use of coepi are found in 1. 47, 11. 6, and below pons institui coeptus est, B. C. I. 7 is doubtful. Drag. Hist. Synt. 1. § 92; the usage is discussed by Madvig, Kleine Philologische Schriften 363.
in fines Sugambrorum] the arguments adduced by Napoleon in favour of Bonn as the locality of Caesar’s bridge are, I think, as satisfactory as any reasoning could be which has to be based on the scanty information that Caesar vouchsafes to give us. Goler followed by Long places the crossing between Neuwied and Coblenz; within these limits he thinks that Urmitz, a village nearly opposite Engers, best satisfies the conditions of the narrative. If Caesar crossed at Bonn he would probably be near the border line of the Sugambri and Ubii; Drusus crossed here about 50 years after on his way to chastise the Sugambri, and this is no doubt a strong argument in favour of Napoleon’s view.
28	coeptus est] see above on materia coepta erat.
30 finibus excesserant] Caesar also has ex finibus excedere.
Chap. 19.
33 succisis] cf. 38, v. 9 arboribus succisis; the word is more frequent in poetry than in prose, cf. Verg. G. I. 297, Aen. IX. 435.
Page 10.
de oppidis demigrarent] cf. 4 ex aedificiis demigrare where the ex implies going ‘out of’ the houses: the simple ablative is also used with demigrare.
unum in locum] possibly near Niimberg (Goler).
Digitized » GOOgle	UN,VERsI",RGINCapp. 17—21]
8 hic...ibt\ these words both refer to the same place.
omnibus rebus...quarum rerum] cf. 7 in ea loca...quibus in locis.
obsidione] the pressure to which they were subjected by the Suebi.
satis et] perhaps we should read satis se et.
rescidit] the usual word for breaking up a bridge, cf. I. 7 pontem iubet rescindi.
Chap. 20.
septentriones] the mss vary between this and septentrionem; either would be correct, septem triones = ‘the seven oxen’ or ‘ploughers’; triones boves appellantur a bubulcis etiam nunc says Festus. The word is used both in the singular and in the plural for the north as here, c£ 1. 1; it may be written in two separate words as by Verg. G. III. 381, Hyperboreo septem subiecta trioni gens. Tr. ‘trends towards the north’.
quod...intellegebat] Kraner points out that the aid furnished by Britain to Gaul (cf. III. 9) was hardly so important as to necessitate an invasion of the island; rather the expedition was undertaken by Caesar to keep his army in training and occupation and to increase the glory of the Roman name.
r magno sibi usui fore] the so-called predicative dative ‘would be for a
great service to himself’, ‘ would be of great use to him ’. These datives are fully discussed by R. pref. vol. 11.
si adisset] ‘if he should approach’: the pluperfect is used because the action is considered as completed in past time with reference to the advantage likely to accrue from it. Caesar said magno mihi usui fore arbitror si insulam adiero.
quis quam] for the position of quisquam cf. I. neque vestitus praeter pelles haberent quicquam.
Gallias] the plural is used with reference to the three main divisions, Belgae, Galli, Aquitani, cf. I. 1.
vocatis] ‘though he summoned’.
30	aut] quem...haberent and quibus...uterentur are two subdivisions of
the single negative clause neque...uterentur; had quibus...uterentur been an independent negative clause co-ordinate with the rest, neque would have been used in place of aut, hence one must be careful to translate aut ‘or’ and not ‘nor’.
maiorum] ‘ships of the larger size ’
Chap. 21.
32 ad] the order is praemittit ad haec cognoscetida.
Page 11.
Morinos] the Morini occupied the department of Pas de Calais; Vergil Aen. viii. 727 calls them extremi hominum.DE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. IV.
superiore aestate]	cf. ni. 9. The Veneti occupied what is now the
department of Morbihan; the town of V annes perpetuates the memory of their name.
8 obsides dare] Caesar might have written se obsides daturos.. .obtempe- raturos.
Atrebatibus]	the Atrebates were situated S. of the Morini. In the
centre of their district was the town of Nemetocenna, now Arras. For the defeat of this tribe cf. 11. 16 foil.; the appointment of Commius has not been previously mentioned; he is spoken of again in vii. 76.
probabat] ‘of whose valour and prudence he was satisfied *.
adeat] ut is frequently omitted after verbs of commanding, cf. III. 11 huic mandat, Remos adeatt with which contrast htiic mandat ut revertatur in the beginning of this chapter.
fidem sequantur] the exact sense of sequi fidem is not quite clear ; the expression occurs again v. 20 Caesaris fidem secutus ; Kraner explains it as = in fidem se tradere ‘to throw oneself upon the protection of a person \
qui non auderet] ‘considering that he did not venture *.
Chap. 22.
qui se] ‘to make excuses for their previous policy, in that as barbarians
and unacquainted with our habits, they had made war upon the Roman people ’.
quae imperasset] pluperfect because the giving of the commands is completed and past before the obedience is rendered, cf. 20 si adisset.
propter anni tempus] it was now August. In 20 Caesar tells us that winter began early in these parts.
has tantularum rerum occupationes] tr. freely ‘these trifling occupations ’. anteponendas Britanniae * should be preferred to Britain’, i. e. to the conquest or exploration of Britain.
eos] the Morini.
navibus] 80 ships for two legions, i.e. 20 cohorts, would give four ships for one cohort of 360 men (assuming Caesar’s legion to have consisted of 3,600 men). Goler thinks that of these four ships, one would carry the baggage and the remaining three the men of the cohort, but it is expressly stated in 30 that the troops had left their baggage in Gaul, and we may thus suppose that each ship carried 90 men, a fourth part of the cohort. We learn from 37 that a transport could carry 150 men. The normal strength of the legion at this time was 6,000, but in v. 49 we find that two legions are reckoned as consisting of 7,000 men, and there are other indications which lead us to conclude that the strength of Caesar’s legions frequently did not greatly exceed 3,000: cf. B. C. ill. 89 where 75 cohorts contain 22,000 men.
coactis contractisque] there is no need to doubt the correctness of this the reading of all mss. The following exx. will show that there is no
Digitized by Googlegreat difference between cogere and contrahere:—Corn. Nep. IV. magnam classem contrahere, Caes. B. G. III. 9 naves quam plurimas cogere, B. G. I. 34 exercitum in unum locum contrahere, Cic. Fam. xv. 4 § 2 coacto in unum locum exercitu: cogere is perhaps rather to ‘press’ into one’s service.
53 duas] the Viith and xth; cf. 25 and 32.
Page 12.
praefectis]	the praefecti were officers of an inferior rank to the legati
(for whom cf. 13); in n they appear in command of the cavalry.
3 ex eo loco] it is no longer possible to determine with certainty Caesar’s place of embarkation; Guest, Heller, Long and others identify the portus Itius (v. 5) with Wissant; the arguments in favour of this view may be briefly summed up thus:—(i) Wissant is the nearest point to the English coast, (ii) It was the chief port of communication from the nth to the 14th century, (iii) A mediaeval writer appears to identify Wissant and Itius. (iv) Caesar speaks of another port eight miles higher up the coast; there is a slight bay at Sangatte about six miles from the Wissant of to-day and about eight miles according to Dr Guest from the centre of the old port, (v) Cape Grisnez was called rb *Ikiov aicpbv; probably the portus Itius was near this promontory, and Wissant is close to Grisnez. Against this view it is argued that Wissant is not a port at all, but the coast line has certainly altered since Caesar’s time, and Dr Guest shows the probability of there having once been a sufficiently roomy port between Wissant and Grisnez to contain the whole of Caesar’s fleet. Napoleon, Lewin, Appach and others argue strongly in favour of Boulogne, showing (i) that it is the chief port on this part of the coast, and was known to, and frequently used by, the Romans at a later period: (ii) that just eight miles higher up the coast is Amble- teuse, where there is a small river; this would exactly correspond to Caesar’s portus superior. Objectors to this view urge that the Romans called Boulogne Gesoriacum, a name which there is no particular reason for supposing to have originated at a later date: if Caesar had meant Boulogne he would probably have called it by its ordinary name Gesoriacum. Again, though Boulogne is just 30 Roman miles from Dover, which approximates to Caesar’s estimate of the distance of the portus Itius from the English coast, yet it is by no means the nearest point, Wissant being only 24 or 25 Roman miles, and of course no great reliance can be placed on Caesar’s measurement of distance by sea. Lastly, Goler considers Wissant to have been the principal port and Calais the portus superior of the first and the portus Itius of the second crossing: his earlier view that Ambleteuse was the point of embarkation and Wissant the portus superior is to a certain extent supported by Mommsen, whose words it will be well to quote: ‘It requires the implicit faith of local topographers to proceed to the determination of the locality with such data—data of which the best in itself becomes almost useless from the variation of the authorities as to the number; but among the many possibilities most may perhaps be said in favour of the view that the Itian
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. IV.
port (which Strabo is probably right in identifying with that from which the infantry crossed in the first voyage) is to be sought near Ambleteuse to' the West of Cape Grisnez, and the cavalry-harbour near Ecale (Wissant)to the East of the same promontory*. Momms. iv. 257 n. (Engl. Transl.).
equitibus] Caesar does not give the number of the cavalry; it was usual for each legion to have an ala of about 300 cavalry attached to it; the cavalry then of the two legions would amount to 600, which distributed among 18 ships would give a trifle over a turma, the tenth part of an alat to each ship.
portum tenore] ‘to hold* or ‘occupy the port*. This must be distinguished from the nautical phrase tenere for tenere cursum ad ‘to hold on one’s way*, ‘to make’, as in Tac. Agr. 38 classis portum tenuit.
Chap. 23.
tertia fere vigilia] the night, reckoned from sunset to sunrise, was divided into four vigiliae (watches) of varying length according to the season of the year.
solvit] ‘weighed anchor*, cf. V. 23.
ulteriorem portum] cf. above on ex eo loco. It is called portus superior
Britanniam attigit] no doubt near Dover.
continebatur] the sea was so closely bordered, hemmed in, by mountains: angustis properly means ‘closely-packed*, ‘contracted*; the use of the word is remarkable, and Kraner and Long are probably right in explaining it as here equivalent to ‘sheer’ or ‘steep*: the latter quotes Liv. XXI. 36 ventum deinde ad multo angustiorem rupem, and remarks ‘as a mountain generally has a slope it may be said to be contracted if it has no slope’.
adigi] cf. B. C. ill. 51, B. Af. 72; Madvig restores the same word in B. G. 11. 21, in. 14, B. C. II. 34, ill. 56 (twice), B. Af. 56.
horam nonani] between 2.30 and 3.30 p.m.
monuitque] the first and the second ut— ‘as*, the third is closely connected with quaet ut quae being equivalent to quippe quae; then another ut must be understood with administrarentur ‘enjoined upon them that everything should be carried out’; for the omission of ut after monere cf. 21. Tr. the whole sentence somewhat thus:—‘Enjoined upon them that everything should be carried out at the slightest hint and at the right moment, as the rules of warfare and especially as the maritime service required, subject as it was to sudden and uncertain changes*.
iid nutum] lit. ‘at a nod*, i.e. at the slightest hint from those in authority; ad tempus ‘just at the right moment*.
ventum et aestum uno tempore nanctus secundum] all readers of Caesar’s narrative will desire to know, as far as they may be known, the exact dates of all the chief occurrences connected with his British Ex-
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIApedition. By a careful comparison of the few indications given by Caesar it is possible to fix certain points of time with considerable precision. From IV. -20, 32, 36, it appears that the expedition was undertaken in August. In 29 Caesar says that four days after his arrival there was a heavy storm, and that night the moon was full; astronomical calculations have shown that there was a full moon at 3 a.m. on August 31. Caesar then landed on the fourth day before the 30th: this according to the Roman method of reckoning is the 27th; (this is shown by Heller against Napoleon who makes the 25th the day of landing; so also Wex, Tac. Agric. p. 181, criticising Halley who fixed the 26th as the date, says 'nam ex Romanorum computandi ratione dies quartus post xxvi non est dies xxx sed xxix quod satis constat inter philologos et iuris consultos’). Caesar tells us that he started from the French coast during the third watch, i. e. between midnight and 2.30 a.m., stood off the cliffs (evidently of Dover) about the fourth hour of the day, i.e. about 10 a.m. and waited at anchor till the ninth hour, about 3 or 3.30 p.m., and having meanwhile summoned his officers and given them the necessary instructions, finding wind and tide favourable, proceeded on his way. So far all is plain: the difficult and all-important question now arises— did Caesar sail eastwards or westwards? round the South Foreland or towards Romney Marsh? To decide this the state of the tides has to be considered. On the 27th of August B.c. 55 there was high water at Dover between 7.42 and 8.30 a.m. (Lewin append, p. lxxxviii), but at , a little distance from the shore the flood-tide flowing in an easterly direction sets in about 2\ or 3 hours before high water, and therefore between 4.57 and 5.45 p.m. on the day in question, or a little later if the short interval of slack water be taken into account; but the turn of the stream is influenced by the direction of the wind, and if this were blowing from the west, as seems probable, (for the wind that Caesar found favourable in starting from his anchorage off Dover appears to have been the same wind that prevented the ships conveying the cavalry from quitting the portus superior, and this circumstance would seem to indicate a westerly wind,) the stream might, as Heller says, have turned eastward before the hour above-mentioned, say at 4.30 p.m., at which time Caesar could have availed himself of it in order to round the South Foreland. Mr Lewin and others feeling themselves bound by the words of the Commentaries to fix Caesar’s departure from his anchorage at 3.30 p.m. naturally assume that he sailed westward, since at that hour the ebb tide was running, and landed near Hythe or Limne, but for reasons to be given hereafter it is more probable that he landed at Deal, and that it was at least possible for him to sail in that direction has been sufficiently shown by Dr Guest and chiefly by Heller whose arguments I have here in a great measure reproduced. Caesar would probably reach Deal about 6 p.m., quite in time to land his troops before night.
aperto ac piano litore] this is no doubt the comparatively level shore between Walmer and Deal; Dion Cassius says that Caesar first rounded a headland, by which he must mean the South Foreland. The best MSS omit the word aperto, but the omission is probably accidental, cf.
V. 9 litore molli atque aperto.
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. IV.
Chap. 24.
essedariis] the mode of fighting from the essedum or esseda (for both forms are found) is described in 30.
subsecuti] the Britons on the cliffs seeing the fleet stand out to sea again and guessing Caesar’s intention, marched at once to oppose the landing. The distance from Dover Castle to Walmer Castle in a straight line is just six miles.
Page 13.
1	militibus]	dative with the gerundives desiliendum,	consistendum, pug
nandum ‘our soldiers had at one and the same time to leap from their vessels, to take their stand in the waves and to encounter the foe’, ignotis locis is an ablative of attendant circumstances (cf. 1 frigidissimis locis and below notissimis locis); tr. freely ‘ignorant as they were of the locality’: impeditis manibus ‘with their hands encumbered’: oppressis dative agreeing with militibus ‘weighed down by the great and heavy burden of their arms’. Madvig makes the sentence less cumbrous by omitting oppressis, suggesting that it was added by a copyist who did not see that magno et gravi onere armorum should be taken with impeditis ‘their hands being encumbered by’ etc.
ex arido] ‘on (lit. ‘from’) dry ground*: these words must not be taken with progressi.
expeditis] if expediti, which has equal MSS authority, be read, tr. ‘unencumbered in all their limbs’; the ablative membris expressing ‘the part concerned or thing in point of which a term is applied or an assertion made’, R. § 1210.
insuefactos] ‘habituated’ to such methods of fighting. The word is said not to occur elsewhere.
Chap. 25.
ad t/sum] there is an opposition between usus and species; the warships had the double advantage of being more terror-striking in appearance and more effective in use than the transports.
latus apertum] ‘the unprotected flank’.
tormentis]	such as catapultae,	balistae,	scorpiones;	cf. S. D. A. tor
mentum.
paulum modo] ‘just a little*.
decimae legionis]	this was Caesar’s favourite legion, cf. I. 40 end.
aquilam] the eagle was under the charge of the first centurion of the first cohort (centurio primi pili). Valerius Maximus tells in grandiloquent language a story of a soldier named Caesius Scaeva, who is said to have got on a rock adjoining the shore, where, isolated from his comrades, he sustained an unequal contest against a number of the enemy, till at last, wounded and disarmed, he swam back to his boat and begged pardon of Caesar for returning without his shield. Caesar complimented him on
Digitized by GOOgl.0his bravery, and advanced him to the rank of centurion. This incident is not mentioned by Caesar; Davies wrongly identified it with the exploit of the aquilifer.
ut ea res] the centurion probably used the solemn formula of vows or
prayers 1 quae res (or ‘quod') legioni feliciter eveniat' or ‘bene vortatcf. Liv. I. 2 § 1 contra Tullus Mettium benigne alloquitur, quod bene vortat, castra Albanos Romanis castris iungere iubet: and § 7 iquod bonum faustum felixque sit populo Romano ac mihi vobis que, Albani, populum omnem Albanum Romam traducere in animo est': XXI. 17 adorati dii, ut bene ac feliciter eveniret, quod bellum populus Romanus iussisset>
praestitero] fut. perf. ‘I shall have done my duty’.
cohortati inter se] ‘with mutual exhortation*. The Latins, having no reflexive pronoun like dXX^Xous in Greek, supply its place by such phrases as invicem, inter se, alius alium.
primi] this is Madvig’s emendation, adopted by Kraner, for primis the cumbrous reading of the mss (proximis by itself would give the sense required, primis adds nothing new): the sense is ‘when first those who were in the nearest ships had seen him * (and afterwards those in the more distant ships); this frequent use of ex has been noticed before, cf. 10: those who were in the ships saw from the ships.
Chap. 26.
28 firjniter insistere] ‘keep a firm foothold*.
occurrerat]	occurri is the usual form of the perfect, though occucurri is
sometimes found.
33. plures paucos] the subject of circumsistebant is not strictly plures but hostes, to which plures is in apposition.
Page 14.
scaphas] small rowboats carried by large ships, whether merchantmen or men of war. speculatoria navigia ‘spy boats’. Vegetius says that they were painted the colour of the sea in order to escape detection ne candore prodantur, colore veneto, qui marinis est fluctibus similis, vela tinguntur et funes: cera etiam, qua ungere solent naves, injicitur: nautae quoque vel milites venetam vestem induunt, ut non solum per noctem sed etiam per diem facilius lateant explorantes.
iussit...submittebat] Kraner calls attention to the change of tense: the order was given once for all, the boats were properly manned and sent several times.
simul] =simul atque.
cursum tenere] ‘hold on their course and make the island*. For this use of capere,cf. 36, V. 8, 23.
hoc unum ad pristinam fortunam Caesari defuit] this sentence is not an easy one to analyse: the notion underlying ad seems to be that of
P. CAE.	6
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. IV.
‘going towards*, ‘going to make up* (as we might say ‘these sums go to make up my income’); tr. perhaps ‘this was the only exception Caesar met with to the good fortune which had hitherto attended him*. Cf. an exactly similar sentence in B. C. III. 2 hoc unum Caesari ad celeritatem conficiendi belli defuit, B. G. VI. 43 semper paulum ad summam felicitatem defuisse videretur.
Chap. 27.
se ex fuga receperunt] ‘recovered themselves from flight* with an implied notion of ‘stopping from flight’, cf. 11. 12, iv. 34: VI. 41 and vii. 20 seem rather different
imperasset] cf. note on 22.
facturos] the best mss have facturos esset but Caesar usually omits esse in sentences of this kind; some mss have sese facturos; either this or facturos sese is probably right, cf. below sese daturos dixerunt.
demonstraveram] we should say ‘as I have shown above’, as in V. 3 ui supra demonstravimus and elsewhere : the pluperfect occurs in Plaut. Capt. 17 ut dixeram ante. The mission of Commias was mentioned in 21.
oratoris modo] ‘in the character of an ambassador*.
22 arcessitam] the editors generally prefer this form to accersitamt the reading of the MSS. It is not certain whether there were two distinct verbs arcesso, accerso, or whether they are merely different ways of spelling the same verb.
comynendare coeperunt] this is the reading of the best MSS. Some have commendarunt.
Chap. 28.
post diem quartum] for the probable dates of these events cf. note on
23-
ex superiore portu] cf. 22.
30 ex castris viderentur] Heller reasonably asks how it was possible, supposing Caesar to have been encamped anywhere in the neighbourhood of Romney Marsh, for these ships when actually in sight of the camp to be overtaken by a gale which should drive some of them to the lower part of the island, evidently on or below Dungeness, and others back to the port whence they started. Few will believe such a thing possible; whereas if we suppose Caesar to have been encamped near Deal, we can readily understand how these ships, when off the N. Foreland and in sight of the camp, may have been driven by a northerly gale, partly towards the S. of Britain and partly towards the French coast.
ad inferiorem partem insulae] probably Dungeness.
propius solis occasum] the preposition prope and its comparative and superlative propius proxime are used with the accusative. In v. 13
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIACaesar explains the position and shape of Britain as far as he was acquainted with it
Page 15.
deicerentur] ‘were driven out of their course*. Caesar does not mean that they were actually stranded.
quae tamen] tamen belongs only to ancoris iactis and does not qualify the rest of the sentence, ‘which, having notwithstanding anchored, when they began to fill’ etc., cf. v. 11.
adversa nocte] ‘in the face of night’, ‘when night was coming on’, Kraner, but perhaps the words mean simply ‘though it was a bad night*.
Chap. 29.
4	luna plena, qui dies\ cf. 1 ea hieme qui fuit annus; 38 siccitates paludum
quo perfugio.
aestus] at the present day the spring tides rise 19 feet at Dover. It is strange that the Romans should not have become acquainted with this from their intercourse with the Gauls if not from their own observation: on the French coast at Boulogne the rise is 25 feet.
quibus] ‘by which* instrumental ablative, not ‘in which*. It will be noticed that Caesar is writing carelessly here: in 22 he said that he transported the legions in 80 transports, the naves longae being assigned to the officers; while here he speaks of having transported his troops iexercitum) in the naves longae which are in the next line distinguished from the onerariae. It is scarcely necessary to have recourse to the theory of interpolation as Kraner does.
administrandi] ‘of managing them’ (theships), cf. Bell. Alex. 21 quo
(into which ship) multitudo hominum insecuta cum irrumperet, neque administrandi neque repellendi a terra facultas daretur,
ri	reliquae cum] ‘while the rest*: for the position of cum cf. 11.
ad reficiendas naves erant usui] cf. V. 1 ea quae sunt usui ad armandas
naves. infra 31.
Chap. 30.
frumento commeatuque] these words are frequently thus united, com- meatus ‘supplies’ is a term of wider extent than frumentum ‘grain*.
rursus] denotes their change of plan and does not mean ‘for the second time*. K.
Chap. 31.
eventu] ‘from what had befallen his ships*. This usage of eventus ( = £t>fi<popd) should be distinguished from its more ordinary meaning ‘result* as in eventus pugnae. The distinction is not clearly marked by Forcellini. K. qu. vm. 23 Bellovacorum eventum.
dare intermiserant] intermittere with infinitive not elsewhere in Caesar, but frequently used by the author of the Bell. Afr.; it is also used by Cicero.
GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. IV.
Page 16.
ex continenti] continens terra (the noun is usually omitted) does not mean ‘the adjacent land’ so much as ‘the continuous’ or ‘unbroken land’ ‘the mainland’ in opposition to a comparatively small or isolated portion of land.
reliquis]	instrumental abl. Tr. literally ‘he brought it about that
sailing could be tolerably well effected with the rest’, more freely ‘he succeeded in making the rest tolerably seaworthy*.
Chap. 32.
hominum] the natives.
pro portis castrorum] the Roman camp which was always constructed on a systematic plan had four gates, praetoria, decumana, principalis dextra, principalis sinistra, the two latter being at the ends of the via principalis which ran through the camp, in statione ‘on guard’.
11 quam consuetudo ferrei\ ‘than in the ordinary course of things *. This absolute use of ferre, for which there is no exact equivalent in English, should be particularly noticed; it occurs again v. 13«/ fert opinio, vi. 7 fert consuetudo: cf. also VII. 46 ut natura montis ferebat.
15 in stationem succedere] ‘to take their place on guard*.
17	sustinere] ‘to be holding their ground*, cf. 11.
esse venturos] the insertion of esse with the future participle in -rus is rare in Caesar. Cf. 27.
noctu] ablative (the only case in use) of a fern, noun nodus, cf. diu.
tum dispersos] the compression of language in this sentence is very remarkable, and cannot be preserved in an English translation.
Chap. 33.
24 genus hoc est] in this chapter we have a digression as in 10, where Caesar breaks off his narrative to describe the geography of the country.
terrore equoruni] ‘the fright inspired by the horses’.
turmas] an ala of cavalry was usually attached to each legion; it consisted of 10 turmae, each of which contained about 30 horsemen. The ala was commanded by a praefectus equitum.
aurigae] Tacitus, speaking of the Britons in the 1st cent, a.d., says quaedam nationes et curru proeliantur: honestior auriga ; clientes pro- pugnant Agr. 12 ; he calls them covinnarii, which is probably derived from some Keltic word meaning ‘car’, just as in Caesar they are called essedarii from esseda; ‘car’ also of Keltic origin.
31 ita mobilitatem] ‘thus they combine in fighting the rapid movements of cavalry with the steadfastness of infantry’.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAPage 17.
incitatos] ‘when at full speed’, brew ‘quickly*, ‘in a moment*.
moderari and its cognate words were regularly applied, to the management of horses; the following exx. are taken from the lexicons: moderamen equorum Ov. Met. 11. 47; habere moderanter habenas Lucr. II. 1096; moderator equorum Ov. Met. IV. 245, Tib. IV. 1. 114; equum frenis moderarier Lucr. V. 1297 ; moderari habenas Ov. Met. VI. 223; cf. also languentis populi incitatio et effrenati moderatio Cic. de Orat. II. 35, which also illustrates incitatos.
percurrere] ‘run over’ i.e. ‘along’ the pole.
Chap. 34.
quibus rebus] the accumulation of ablatives should be compared with vil. 17 summa difficultate etc.: quibus rebus is instrumental abl. ‘by which things’; pert. nost. abl. abs. ; nov. pugn,. causal abl., ‘on account of’, te7np. opp. abl. of time. It is however quite possible that pert. nost. may be dative after auxilium tulit.
se ex timore] cf. 27.
fo qui erant in agiis reliqui] the Britons; cf. 32 cum pars hominum in agris remaneret. They now retired to their strongholds or oppida.
quae...continerent] ‘such as to keep’, ‘sufficient to keep*, not ‘which
kept ’, for that would require quae continebant.
r6 si expulissent] ‘if they should succeed in expelling*. In v. 9 expellere ex occurs.
17 his rebus] ‘by these means*.
Chap. 35.
de quo] cf. 21 where the journey of Commius is mentioned, but nothing is there said about the horsemen.
in aeie] ‘in line of battle*.
tanto spatio...quantum] lit. ‘within so much space* quantum ‘as (‘as much as’, spatium is not to be supplied with it) they could manage by running and exertion ’, Kr. ‘ Having pursued them as far as their speed and strength permitted’ (Bohn).
Chap. 36.
propinqua die aequinoctii] abl. abs. ‘the equinox being near*. The autumnal equinox fell on Sep. 24th; Lewin, Kraner: (on the 26th; Napoleon. Which is right?)
hiemi subiciendam] ‘should be exposed to the chances of winter*.
nanctus] Kraner writes nanctus here but nactus in 35 ; Caesar himself was probably more consistent. I have written nanctus throughout.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. IV. V.
Page 18.
quos reliqui] ‘as the rest* (of the men); one would have expected reliquae ‘the rest of the ships’, but tne crews are put for the ships.
portus capere] cf. 26 insulam capere. It does not appear from Caesar’s narrative whether these two transports were stranded on the beach or whether they succeeded in entering any port; supposing the other ships to have returned to Boulogne, they may, as Nap. suggests, have found refuge in the little port of Hardelot or Camiers or, as Desjardins supposes, in the little creek called Le Portel, between Boulogne and Cap d’Alprech; while if the main body of the fleet returned to Wissant, they may have got in at Ambleteuse. Nap. quotes from Mr Lewin ‘in approaching Boulogne when the tide is flowing in, great attention must be paid, because the current, which on the English side drags a ship towards the East, on the Boulogne side drags them, on the contrary, towards the Somme’.
Chap. 37.
hominum] gen. after milia.
horis quattuor] abl. of time within the limits of which: hence amplius does not necessarily govern horis, but is used independently as often: for abl. cf. B. C. I. 46 cum esset pugnatum continenter horis quinque and I. 7 cuius ductu novem annis rempublicam gesserint (from Kraner).
Chap. 38.
quo perfugio] ‘which they had used as a refuge*; the relative ‘which* is attracted into agreement in number and gender with perfugio when it really refers to paludum, and should therefore strictly be quibus fern, dat. plur. For a similar attraction cf. 1 ea hieme qui fuit annus and 29 accidit ut esset luna plena> qui dies.
dierum xx supplicatio] in 57 B. C. a supplicatio of 15 days was granted to Caesar quod ante id tempus accidit nulli, as he himself says Ii. 35. Cf.
S. D. A. supplicatio.
BOOK V.
Chap. 1, Page 19.
Z. Domitio, Ap. Claudio] L. Domitius Ahenobarbus was killed by Marcus Antonius at the battle of Pharsalus B.c. 48; Cic. Phil. 11. 71 Z. Domitium, clarissimum et nobilissimum virum, occideras multosque praeterea qui e praelio effugerant; B. C. 111. 99 Z. Domitius ex castris in montem refugiens, cum vires eum lassitudine defecissent', ab equitibus est interfectus. Appius Claudius Pulcher brother of the notorious P. Clodius (Claudius) Pulcher, who was tribune B.c. 58, and was murdered by T. Annius Milo in B.c. 52.
itized by GoOglCut quotannis] cf. I. 54, II. 35 where we read of his doing so in the winters of 58—37 and 57—56; he also went into Italy in the following winter, though he does not expressly mention the fact in the Commentaries. He always avows as his object for visiting Italy the need of holding assizes (conventus), but his chief reason was undoubtedly to make himself better acquainted with the state of parties at Rome and to regulate in his own interests the complications of Roman policy.
legatis] cf. n. on IV. 13; there were at this time 10 legati in Gaul.
hieme] cf. Cic. Div. I. 94 Arabes campos et montes hieme et aestate peragrant: this ablative of time is usually accompanied by an adjective: R. § 1180.
curarent] imperfect after the historic present imperat: two inferior mss have curent from an endeavour to preserve the normal sequence of tenses.
subductiones] subducere is the technical term for drawing up on shore or ‘beaching’ a ship; opposed to it is deducere, ‘to launch’, cf. 2, 23.
nostro mart] the Mediterranean; also called mare magnum or mare internum. The adjective mediterraneus was used in classical Latin in the sense of‘midland’, i.e. remote from the sea; cf. 12; Cic. Verr. vn. 27 fin.
9	minus magnos fluctus] the statement is said to be incorrect.
ad onera] notice that this clause is not connected by any copula with the previous clause ad celeritatem, etc.: in Greek they would be connected and to a slight extent opposed by yukv and U.
maribus] this is said to be the only extant instance of the abl. pi. of
mare. R. § 429.
(2	actuarias] actuariae naves were swift galleys propelled either by oar
or sail; B. C. I. 27 actuaria navigia. Cicero has the diminutive actuariola, Att. xvi. 3.
usui ad] cf. IV. 29.
Galliae citerioris] the province of Gallia Cisalpina.
Illyricum] Caesar first went there at the end of 57 B,C. Cf. II. 35, in. 7. Illyria appears to have been constituted a Roman province about 167 B.c. Cf. Liv. xlv. 26. The province of Illyricum was entrusted to Caesar along with the two Gauls for five years in 59 b.c.
Pirustis] little is known of this people. They are mentioned by Strabo as belonging to the Pannonian nation. Livy, XLV. 26, says that they with other tribes were allowed to be liberi et immunes for having taken the Roman side in the war against Gentius B.c. 167. Their habitation seems to have been on the Western border of Macedonia in Roumelia, near lake Ochrida. In Napoleon’s Atlas they are placed in the Camic Alps.
de iniuriis satisfacere] the same phrase is found in I. 14.
arbitros dat] ‘appoints arbitrators’; so the praetor was said dare iudices ‘ to appoint a jury ’.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. V.
litem aestiment] * reckon the costs \
Chap. 2.
circuitis] the loss of the m in circu(m)ire is due to its weak pronunciation ; hence its elision before vowels in poetry.
studio] causal abl.. ‘ owing to ’. It was owing to the zeal of the soldiers that so many ships had been built.
Page 20.
cuius] a curious attraction for quod.
neque multum] * and that they were within a little of being in a condition to be launched in a few days’. It must be observed that abesse is impersonal, lit. * there was only a little wanting therefrom but that they should be capable of being launched
possint] Frigell writes possent after one ms.
quid fieri velit ostendit] a favourite phrase with Caesar.
portum Ilium] cf. n. on 22. The name is sometimes spelt Icius,
xxx transmissum a continenti] I follow Mr Long in retaining transmissum the reading of all the mss; Kraner omits it, but it seems almost required for the sense: Caesar means that the passage traiectus covered a distance of 30 miles from the continent.
militum] gen. after quod\ and as is usual separated from the relative by some intervening words.
veniebant] ‘were in the habit of coming \
transrhenanos] Caesar also has the word cisrhenanus VI. 2 where the seditious practices of the Treveri are also alluded to. Kraner refers to VIII. 25 for mention of their turbulent character.
Chap. 3.
equitatu] they furnished a regiment of horse under the empire; Tac. An. III. 42 ala equitum quae conscHpta e Treveris militia disciplinaque nostra habebatur.
ut supra demonstravimus] for a different tense and number cf. IV. 27 quern supra demonstraveram; the perfect tense and the plural number are the more common.
Indutiomarus]	the a is long here as in all Keltic names ending in
-marus, though Propertius for metrical reasons has Virdomdrus, IV. 10. 41. (Gluck, Keltische Namen, p. 78, foil.)
quae gererentur ostendit] the student should notice the difference between this and quae gerebantur; the clause is subordinate to ostendit, hence the subjunctive; Caesar might have made the clause independent as containing an assertion of his own, in which case gerebantur would have been used.
Digitized by GoogleNOTES.
silvam Arduennam] cf. vi. 29, Tac. An. III. 42 : Shakspere’s ‘Forest of Arden’, only there is said to have been a wood called Arden near Stratford-on-Avon.
in silvam abditis] notice the expressiveness of in with acc. after abdere: ‘having been sent into the forest for concealment’.
27 de suitprivatim rebus] ‘about their own individual interests’.
29 possent] this must be right, though all the mss but one have posset. The name Indutiomarus should probably be omitted; in two MSS it comes before veritus.
33 laberetur] ‘fall away ‘fail in their allegiance’.
Chap. 4, Page 21.
quaeque eum res] the defection of the chieftains and the fear of chastisement.
nominatim evocaverat] the subject is Caesar, nom. ev. is elsewhere used in a more special sense of calling out reserves, etc. Cf. VII. 39.
quod cum] ‘ wherein he both understood that he was acting according to his (Cingetorix) deserts and thought’, etc. cum...turn ‘both . and *.
cuius...per spexisset] —cum eius...perspexissety ‘since he had recognised his so remarkable goodwill towards himself’. Caesar is not merely stating as a fact that he had recognised the goodwill of Cingetorix, but implies that his having recognised it was the cause of his present kindness ; hence the subjunctive and not the indicative.
id tulit factum graviter] for id factum graviter tulit, cf. 6 quod dictum graviter ferebant.
suam gratiam] ‘viz. that his popularity with his own people should be diminished ’. The clause amplifies and explains id.
qui..fuisset] another subjunctive worth notice; it is equivalent to cum is fuisset ‘although he had been*.
hoc dolore] * through this indignation *, i. e. ‘ through indignation at this’.
Chap. 5.
19 Meldis] the Meldi occupied a small district to the east of Paris. The ships would be conveyed to the sea by the Seine or the Marne.
27 cum ipse abesset] subjunctive because the clause is virtually suboblique; as if the sentence had been written verebatur ne motus Galliae fieret cum ipse abesset, where the clause cum ipse abesset is clearly seen to be suboblique, that is, subordinate to the oblique clause ne fieret. Kenn. § 190.
Chap. 6.
73 Dumnorix] brother of Divitiacus; for some account of his character cfi 1. 18.
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. V.
cupidum]	notice the emphatic repetition cupidum...cupidum and
magni... magnae.
Page 22.
1	neque] = neque ta?nen, so in IV. 26 neque longius prosequi potuerunt;
VII. 45, 62.
omnibus precibus] ‘every kind of entreaty*, cf. VII. 4 omnibus tormentis, * every kind of punishment ’.
insuetus navigandi] Forcellini qu. Nep. Dion. 7 insuetus male audiendi.
quod...diceret] ‘because he said he was hindered by religious scruples’, i.e. ‘because, as he said, he was hindered by religious scruples’. Cf. R. § 1746, Kenn. § 209 A 3 c. In vn. 75 two mss have dicerent, the rest dicebant.
metu territare] these words are omitted in two MSS.
fidem reliquis interponere] cf. Cic. p. Rose. Am. 114 si in earn rem fidem suam interponeret; again in B. G. v. 36; B. Al. 63 fidem suam in re omni interponit. Tr. ‘he gives solemn assurances to the rest*.
deferebantur]	it should be noticed that deferre and perferre are both
frequently used of the conveyance of a message or news, but with a very slight difference of sense, perferre emphasizing the conveyance of the news over intervening space {per), deferre the ultimate handing in of the news or message {de ‘from* oneself): adferre again, is simply ‘ bring to ’, 53 nuntio allato. It is not always possible or advisable to preserve the distinction in translation.
Chap. 7.
quod...quod] —oti filv...8n St.
19	prospiciendum]	supply statuebat.
commoratus] dabat operam is contemporaneous with commoratus, as
Kraner points out; hence tr. ‘staying’, not ‘having stayed’.
Corus ventus] the N.W. wind; the word is doubtless connected etymologically with the English ‘shower’. The following passage from Aulus Gellius is worth quoting: hi sunt igitur tres venti orientales: aquilo, voltumus, eurus, quorum medius eurus est. his oppositi et contrarii sunt alii tres occidui : caurus, quem solent Graeci dpyeo-rrjv vocare : is adversus aquilonem flat; item alter favonius qui Graece ft<f>vpos vocatur: is adversus eurum flat; tertius africus, qui Graece adversus voltumum facit. hae duae regiones caeli orientis occidentisque inter sese adversae sex habere ventos videntur. One may understand the meaning of this at once by drawing a line from N. to S. and by placing down the right-hand side of this line to one looking N. the three winds N.E., E., S.E.,and exactly opposite these on the left-hand side the three winds N.W., W., S.W.; this will show what Gellius means by saying that N.W. is oppositus et contrarius to N. E.; of course to our notion S.W. is opposite to N.E.
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGNOTES.
magnam partem omnis temporis] a remarkable phrase of which I remember no other instance; Schneider qu. vi. 18 spatia omnis temporis.
27	a castris] ‘away from *, not ‘out of* the camp, cf. iv. 6 etc.
reirahiquc\ sc. turn, which may possibly have fallen out between re- trahique and imperat“.
pro sano] ‘ like a sane man *. Kr. qu. Plaut. Menaechmi 294 pro sano loqueris.
qui...neglexissei\ ‘when he had neglected*, cf. 4 cuius voluntatem perspexisset.
ille enim revocatus] enim is evidently wrong. Ciacconius, followed by Madvig, proposes enimvero, but this, according to Kraner, is contrary to Caesar’s usage, autem, which is read in a few early editions and is adopted by Frigell, suits the sense but has no mss authority. One might suggest either ille vero revoc. supposing the vero to have been lost before revo-, or at ille revoc. supposing at to have been lost after the last syllable of neglexisset.
Chap. 8, Page 23
8 pro tempore acpro re] tempus the needs or requirements of the time; res ‘circumstances.’ The two nouns are frequently thus joined; cf. Sail. Cat. 50.
fo pari numero equitum quem] —eodem numero quem.
ad solis occasum] it is ascertained from certain passages in Cicero’s letters that Caesar’s second invasion of Britain took place in July. Cicero, writing to his brother Quintus (Q. F. II. 13) who was with Caesar, says that he had received a letter from him, written at Placentia, and dated June 2. Afterwards we find Cicero writing to Atticus (Att. iv. 15) on July 27, and saying that by that time his brother was probably in Britain. Later still he writes to Quintus, acknowledging the receipt of several letters, one of which had been written from Britain on Aug. 10. These indications fix the time of Caesar’s invasion to the end of July and the beginning of August. But the date may be still more nearly determined. Caesar says that he left the French coast at sunset with a fair wind from the S.W., and that about midnight the wind dropped and the tide carried him some distance, so that in the morning he saw the coast of Britain on his left: from this statement it has been concluded that he was carried to the Northward, probably to the East of the Goodwin Sands by the flux or current of the rising tide. Presently the tide having turned, that is, the reflux of the ebbing tide having set in, the fleet by dint of hard rowing reached the shore about noon, that is, in about 8 hours. Caesar must then, as Napoleon says on the authority of experienced seamen, have been at least 10 miles from the coast; at this distance the reflux begins to be felt about 4 hours after high water; it remains then, in order to determine the date, to discover on what day in July the reflux of the ebbing tide began to be felt about 10 miles off Deal at daybreak or about 4 a.m.; in other words, on what day it was
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. V.
high water at Dover about 11.30 p.m., the time of high water being about half an hour earlier at Dover than at a distance of 10 miles from Deal. Now it is ascertained that the tide was high at Dover at 11.30 p.m., on the 6th and the 20th of July; the above-mentioned indications afforded by Cicero’s letters point to the latter of these dates as the more probable, and thus we are justified in assuming that it was at daybreak on the morning of July 21 that Caesar took advantage of the reflux and brought his fleet to his old landing-place near Deal and Walmer. This, to all appearances accurate, statement of the circumstances of Caesar’s crossing is taken from the Histoire de Jules Cesar.
fi	Africo] the S.W. wind, so called by the Romans because it blew
from the direction of Africa.
sub sinistra] these words admit of no satisfactory explanation if any
theory be admitted which makes Caesar land anywhere south of Dover. Mr Lewin, who thinks that Caesar landed near Lympne, says, ‘when the morning broke which, as the sun rose at 4 a.m., would be about 3.30, the high cliffs between Folkestone and Dover were visible on their left’: no doubt they were, but would not the high cliffs of the S. Foreland be equally visible on the right or nearly in front, supposing the ships were heading up channel? and if the ships were two or three miles off the S. Foreland, and the weather were, moderately clear, the whole coast as far as the cliffs of Ramsgate and the N. Foreland would be visible; how then could Caesar say ‘ sub sinistra Britanniam relictam conspexit'1 I entirely agree with Heller, that these words could only be correctly used on the supposition that Caesar was carried some little distance off the N. Foreland whence no land whatever would be visible except on the left. It appears from Caesar’s description of Britain in 13, that he regarded the N. Foreland as the commencement of that side of Britain which in his view faced north, and he would probably have been surprised to learn that by sailing about 50 miles due N. of the N.E. extremity of Cantium, it would be possible to arrive at another part of Britain.
qui vectoriis] lit. ‘who with their ships built for burden and heavy
(1vectoriis gravibusque), by incessant toil of rowing, equalled the speed of ships of war.’
cum magnae'] ‘ though large bands had assembled thither \
annotinis] the fleet of the previous year consisted of 98 ships of burden besides some naves longae IV. 22.
sui quisque commodi] * private vessels which individuals had made for their own use’. The genitive seems to depend on some word understood but not expressed, such as causa.
in] abdere followed by in with acc., as in IV. 38, v. 3, 9.
Chap. 9.
cohortibus x] ten cohorts are numerically equal to one legion: the reason that Caesar prefers this expression to the more obvious una legio
inal fr Y OFCapp. 8—10]	NOTES\	85
no doubt is that these cohorts were contingents from two or more legions; possibly he took two cohorts from each of his five legions.
30 veritus navibus] i fearing for his ships ’: the dat. with vereri is rare cf. Cic. Acad. II. 138 vos autem, mihi veremini, qu. by Davies: it is more common with timere, metuere etc. Cf. Vergil’s inopi metuens formica senectae G. I 186.
•	Page 24.
flumen]	Goler, Kraner, Heller, Guest, and Long are agreed that
the Great Stour answers best to the requirements of the narrative; the scene of the battle is generally placed at or near Sturry, while Mr Long inclined first to Grove Ferry, but afterwards supported the claims of Chilham. He expresses his surprise at Napoleon’s considering the Little Stour to be the flumen in question; it is nothing more than a small dry ditch in summer, at least in the neighbourhood of Kingston, where he supposes the battle to have taken place. Sturry is nearly or quite 15 Roman miles from Deal.
natura et opere\ ‘by nature and art .
videbantur\ the MSS are about equally divided between videbatur and videbantur; the latter is adopted by Nipperdey and Kraner
ex silvis rari propugnabant] * issued from the woods in small bodies to fight ’.
testudine] it was usual for a column when advancing to storm a strong position to protect themselves from the enemies’ missiles by holding their shields over their heads with little or no interval between shield and shield, thus forming as it were a strong continuous and impenetrable roof: this manoeuvre, from its affording a protection similar to that which the tortoise has in its shell, was called a testudo: cf. Liv. xxxiv. 39.
ttggere\ an earthwork begun at some little distance from the enemies’ entrenchments and gradually made to rise till it equalled or exceeded the height of their defensive works ; the storming party by advancing up this would command the enemies’ position. The usual method of constructing the agger is described in my note on vii. 22, but in the present instance we must suppose the agger to have been of far simpler construction.
munitioni\ above the word munitio was used in a concrete sense for a completed work or fortification, while here it is used in its more common abstract sense to denote the act ot fortifying. Caesar is here speak -
‘ ing of a temporary entrenched camp on the field of battle.
Chap. 10.
postridie eius diei mane\ cf. IV. 13.
cum iam extremi essent in prrospectu] this sentence has occasioned some difficulty, because it is not clearly stated whether Caesar himself accompanied this expeditionary force or whether he remained behind at the river or returned to the camp: from the words in expeditionem misit, and below 11 legiones revocari iubet, it seems almost certain that Caesar was not with the troops who went in pursuit of the enemy:
Original frc
UNIVERSITY OFDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. V.
in this case the words cum iam etc. must, according to Long and Kraner, mean * when the hindmost of them (the pursuing troops) were still in sight*, that is, of Caesar in the camp or wherever else he may have been: but this translation appears to disregard or give a wrong force to iam: one would like to explain the,sentence thus, ‘when the hindmost of them (the enemy) were now in sight* (of the pursuers), but if Caesar was not with the troops how should he know that the arrival of the messenger from Q. Atrius was contemporaneous with the pursuers catching sight of the fugitives? or was he told so afterwards? on the whole I incline to the latter explanation given by Schneider, chiefly on account of the word iam [r}8r]) which thus alone receives its proper signification.
afflictas] ‘shattered*. Distinguish between in litus and in More eiectas; the former has slight mss authority, cf. B. C. in. 28 gubernatorem in terram navem eicere cogunt and eiectus in desertum litus qu. from Seneca by Forcellini.
quod...subsisterent] Caesaris giving the reason as it was represented by the messengers, hence the subjunctive.
Chap. 11.
<24 ipse ad naves revertitur] Caesar does not say whence he returned; Mr Long says from the camp which was at a little distance from the shore but not too far to admit of the ships being enclosed in the same earthwork with it; cf. below, commodissimum esse statuit etc. But I think it will be evident on a careful reading of the chapter that eodem in the sentence eodem unde redierat proficiscitur is the same place as that which Caesar now leaves to visit the ships; hence this cannot be the camp, for Caesar would then be made to say that he left the camp to visit the ships, and having fortified the camp and connected the ships with it, returned to the camp. I think that the place whence Caesar now returns to the ships is the river-bank where the battle had been fought.
amissis] ‘although about 40 ships had been lost’, cf. note on IV. 28 quae tamen.	1
>28 fabros] the Roman army was always accompanied by a corps of fabri under the command of apraefectus fabrum. From the expression used here ex legionibus deligit Kraner concludes that Caesar is speaking of individual skilled workmen among the soldiers of the legion and not of this special corps which was not enrolled in any legion.
posset] imperfect because scribit is an historical present and therefore equivalent to a past tense, though it is followed by the present instituat in the clause immediately dependent on it.
quae sunt apud eum] this is a remarkable instance of the indicative in a subordinate clause: the words may be regarded as little more than a mere epithet of legionibus ‘the present legions’, or ‘the legions with him\ and may therefore be considered as lying out of the range of modal syntax. Cf. vil. 78 constituunt ut ii qui inutiles sunt oppido excedant.
subduci] cf. n. on 1 subductiones.
linal frPage 25.
f ne nocturnis] * even the hours of night * (or 4 night-time *) 4 bringing no intermission from the soldiers’ labours’, ad is used here in away somewhat resembling that noticed on iv. 26.
4 eodent] probably to the river mentioned in 9, near which the enemy had made their stronghold. Cf. note on ipse ad naves revertitur.
summa] ‘the chief command and supreme conduct of the war’.
7. Cassivellauno] probably a latinised form of the Gaelic name Cad- wallon.
8	Tamesis] in Tac. An. xiv. 32 the form Tamesa occurs; so in Dion
Cassius Ta/iloa, hence the e is short. In Piers Plowman we find Temese. When Caesar says that it is 80 miles from the sea, he of course means that that is the distance from the point where he crossed it to his landing- place on the coast.
11 nostro adventu\ it is impossible to say whether these words depend on permoti ‘thrown into consternation by our arrival*, or whether they should be taken by themselves ‘at our arrival’ and permoti—1 in consternation*.
Chap. 12.
13 Britanniae] nothing is known of the history of Britain before the time of Caesar. The aboriginal inhabitants of whom Caesar here talks no doubt belonged to the Keltic branch of the great Indo-European family. Cf. Tac. Agric. 11 ceterum Britanniam qui mortales initio coluerint, indigenae an advecti, ut inter barbaros parum compertum.
r5	Belgio] the land of the Belgae, Gallia Belgica.
transierant] this has more MSS authority than transierunt adopted by Kraner.
iis nominibus] the sentence is slightly irregular; Caesar might have written earum nominibus civitatum, then earum would have been the regular antecedent to quibus. Among the British tribes we find the names of the Atrebates and the Belgae.
bello illato] ‘after having carried hostilities into the country*. There seems no need to alter illato, which refers back to belli inferendi causa; Nipperdey proposed sedato, Koch finito.
Gallicis] ‘Strabo (iv. 197), probably on the authority of Posidonius, says that the Gallic houses were large, built of planks and watling, of a round form (0o\oei5eTs), with a high roof. They were thatched sometimes (B. G. V. 43). In form they would not be unlike some of our circular wheat ricks*. Long.
pecorum magnus numerus] so Tacitus Germ. 5 says of the Germans: numero (pecorum) gaudent, eaeque solae et gratissimae opes sunt.
utuntur] the reading in the text is that of the best mss, others have aereo for aureo. Kraner strikes out the words aut aere; it seems possible that they are the remains of a marginal note aut aereo added by some one who thought aureo wrong and proposed altering it to aereo; the marginal
Digitized by GoOgleDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. V.
note may then have got into the text in the form aut aere. Nipperdey omits the words aut nummo aureo, but according to Mommsen it is certain that there were gold coins in Britain before the Roman invasion, though Cicero says in Britannia nihil esse audio neque auri neque argenti, Fam. VII. 7. Tacitus Agrie. 12 says fert Britannia aurum et argentum and so Strabo.
taleis ferreis] ‘iron bars1. The Romans did the same, cf. Pliny N. H.
XXXIII. 13 Servius rex primus signavit aes.	antea rudi usos Romae
Timaeus tradit, signatum est nota pecudum, unde et pecunia appellata. ad certum pondus examinatis ‘fixed at a certain Standard weight’.
plumbum album] ‘tin’: the tin mines of Cornwall had long been famous. Caesar speaks inaccurately in saying in mediterraneis regionibus.
n in maritimis ferrum] this was in Sussex.
animi] animi causa ‘for the sake of amusement* occurs again in vii 7.
loca] we should say ‘the climate*, remissioribus frigoribus ‘the cold seasons being less severe*.
Chap. 13.
29 triquetrd\ ‘triangular’. The same epithet was frequently applied to Sicily. Caesar represents Britain as three-sided, one side facing east and south and looking towards Gaul, the second facing the west and Spain, the third looking northward. Tacitus gives a nearly similar description Agric. 10, Brita?inia spatio ac caelo in orientem Germaniae, in occidentem Hispaniae obtenditur, Gallis in meridiem etiam inspicitur: septentrionalia eius nullis contra terris, vasto atque aperto mari pulsantur. formam totius Britanniae Livius veterum, Fabius Rusticus recentium eloquentis simi auctores oblongae scutulae vel bipenni adsimulavere. Kraner qu. from Diod. Sic. v. 21 r<£ trx^Awm rplyatvos ovo a TrapcnrXrjolus rtf XiKeXtq, rets rrXevpas ovk IookuXovs lx€l*
32 hoc] sc. latus
Page 26.
existimaturj so the best mss; other readings are existimantur, aestimatur, the latter being adopted by Kraner.
transmissus] gen. after pari spatio.
4 Mona] probably the Isle of Anglesey, which is said to be still called Mon by its inhabitants. It is mentioned by Tacitus Agric. 14.
minores subiectae insulae] Caesar is possibly thinking of the islands off the west coast of Scotland. For stibiectae some inferior mss have obiectae, a reading due to the s of subiectae having fallen out after the s of minores; so in Liv. XXI. 35 according to Madvig the s of succiderentur falling out after the s of homines gave rise to the incorrect MSS reading occiderentur.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAnonnulli] who are these writers ? Perhaps Pytheas of Marseilles was
one ; Schneider qu. Pliny N. H. 11. 77 quod fieri (a long-continued night) in insula Thule Pytheas Massiliensis scripsit, sex dierum navigatione in septentrionem a Britannia distante; quidam vero et in Mona quae distat a Camalduno Britanniae oppido circiter ducentis milibus affirmant. Cf. Tac. Agrie. 12.
nisi...videbamus"] ‘except that we observed*, ‘only we observed*.
certis ex aqua mensuris] ‘ by exact measurement taken by means of water*, i.e. by waterglasses [clepsydrae).
fert] cf. IV. 32 quam consuetudo ferret.
11 angulus] if Caesar means the angulus formed by the two sides facing respectively north and west, the statement is surpassingly absurd, for he must have known well enough that Germany was east of Britain. He may possibly mean the angle formed by the north and east sides, only this angle has been already mentioned as looking eastward.
Chap. 14.
lacte et came vivunt] Strabo says that though they had abundance of milk they had not learnt to make cheese. Napoleon says ‘Strabo even represents them as cannibals; and assures us that the custom existed among them of eating the bodies of their dead relatives*; this is totally incorrect ; Strabo is speaking of the inhabitants of Ireland [Ikppij), whom he expressly states to be aypidrrepoi tup Bperappup.
vitro] isatis tinctoria ‘woad*. The Romans used it for dyeing wool.
horridiore] I write this in preference to the usual reading horridiores, hoc ‘on this account*.
capillo sunt promisso] ablative of quality or description, promittere [crines, barbam, capillum etc.) is the usual term for letting the hair grow.
22 deni duodenique] ‘ten or twelve*.
sed qui] three MSS have sed si qui.
quo] ‘whither’, a brief expression for ‘to whom’ or ‘to whose abode’ as if it had been ad quos, virgo quaeque not ‘each virgin’ but ‘each (woman) when (as) a virgin’, deducere is a regular term for taking a bride to her husband’s home: cf. Liv. X. 23 uni nuptam ad quem virgo deducta sit. Catullus lxviii. 143 nec tamen illa mihi dextra cUducta paterna \ flagrantem Assyrio venit odore domum.
Chap. 15.
praelio conflixerunt] confligere without praelio in 19. In 15—19 we meet with the phrases praelio dimicare, praelio contendere, praelio lacessere.
P. CAE.
Digitized by GOOglC





































Capp. 15—17]	NOTES.	91
arrived’: this sense of integer is very plain in Tac. Agric. 38 Britanni trahere vulneratos, vocare integros.
Chap. 17
25 «r uti...non absisterent] this is the mss reading, ‘in such a way as not to quit (‘keep off’) the standards and legions’, i.e. they kept harassing the Romans. The sentence is undoubtedly a strange one, and Kraner is very likely right in altering sic uti to sic ubi, and omitting non 4 wherever they (the foragers) quitted the standards and legions ’: the enemy did not venture to attack the legions, but cut off all foraging parties who quitted the main body of the troops.
30	aut] this must be distinguished from the previous neque's: ‘ neither
of rallying nor of halting or leaping from their chariots ’: aut combines the two phrases consistendi and ex essedis desiliendi into one enuntiation preceded by neque. Cf. n. on iv. 20.
summis copiis] ‘in full force ’
Chap. 18, Page 28
2 quod flumeri\ the Thames is said to be fordable in summer at several points between Shepperton and London. It is generally agreed that Caesar crossed in this neighbourhood, but the exact place can hardly be ascertained. Kraner puts it between Kingston and Brentford, Napoleon near Sunbury; others, in particular Dr Guest and Mr Lewin, urge the claims of the so-called Co way Stakes 4 at the distance of a furlong to the west of the northern end of Walton bridge*. There appears to have once been a ford here, whence possibly the neighbouring village of Halliford derived its name. Across this ford there were placed a number of stakes which are said to have been shod with iron: some of them were found as late as the end of the last century; one still survives in the British Museum. The ford did not cross the river in a straight line but trended considerably to the east, and then about the middle of the stream turned again westwards and reached the northern bank just opposite its point of departure on the southern bank; the stakes on the contrary were placed straight across so as to intersect the line of the ford twice. It is also stated that there are remains of a Roman camp on some rising ground called St George’s Hill, about a mile and a half to the south of the ford. The Coway Stakes are alluded to by Bede and by Camden. Some suppose these stakes to be the remains of a fishing weir, but it seems more probable that they were originally intended as a defensive work of some kind. Napoleon, on the authority of the two officers MM. Stoffel and Hamelin, who with others conducted in France and Britain the researches and surveys which formed the necessary basis of his work, and to which it owes its chief value, makes the astonishing statement that there is no trace of a ford having ever existed at Coway Stakes, and no tradition of one at Halliford, adding moreover that there never was a camp on St George’s Hill. Mr Lewin deserved better treatment. Those who are interested in the question will find a full account
7—2
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA92	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm.	V.
of It in Mr Lewin’s * Invasion of Britain by Julius Caesar’, though they will not be disposed to accept his suggestion that these stakes may be the remains of the piles of a bridge built by Caesar, notwithstanding an apparent tradition to that effect, and in the valuable papers by Dr Guest in the Athenaeum of July 28, Aug. 4 and n, 1866.
atque hoc] * and there only with difficulty hoc is the masc. of the abl. referring to loco. Cf. 15 missis cohortibus atque his primis.
ad] jn. coptas instructas esse ad alteram, etc. ad of course does not go with animum advertit.
praefixis] several MSS have praefixisque, which may be right. The
word means literally ‘fixed forward’, i.e. fixed in the ground and projecting forwards.
praemisso] this must mean that Caesar sent the cavalry across the
river, ordering the infantry to follow them. Napoleon thinks that Caesar sent the horsemen along the bank, up or down stream, to divert the attention of the enemy, and then sent the infantry across; but this interpretation is scarcely in accordance with Caesar’s language.
1 o cum capite] lit. ‘ though they stood out from the water by the head alone’: ‘though they had only their heads above water’: so Vergil, speaking of stags caught in a snowstorm, summis vix comibus extant. G. in. 370.
dimitterent] ‘give up’, ‘abandon’. K. qu. B. C. I. 25 tie ille Italiam dimittendam non existimaret.
Chap. 19.
contentionis] ‘ of continuing the struggle ’.
cum...eiecerat] for cum with plup. ind. of repeated action, cf. IV. 17 : two MSS have effunderet, liberius ‘ with too little caution ’.
viis] some mss insert notis after viis, and I am inclined to think Schneider right in retaining the word; cf. iv. 26 notis omnibus vadis.
hoc metu] ‘by the alarm thus caused’.
relinquebatur] not ‘the result was that Caesar did not allow’, but ‘the only course left was for Caesar not to allow’: cf. B.C. 1. 63 relinquebatur Caesari nihil nisi ut.
discedi] ‘allowed it to be departed*, i.e. ‘allowed them to depart*.
noceretur] ut must be repeated, ‘and that such injury should be done
the enemy in the way of.	as the soldiers of the legions could effect
by laborious marching *. With the last words cf. IV. 35 quantum cursu et viribus efficere potuerunt.
Chap. 20.
Trinobantes] they occupied the counties of Essex and Suffolk: subsequently they had a king named Cunobelin, Shakspere’s Cymbeline; his son Caractacus (Caradoc, in modem English Cradock) was deieated by the Emperor Claudius a.d. 43.
zed by GoogleNOTES.
Caesaris fidem secutus] cf. iv. 21 hortetur ut populi Romani fidem sequantur.
pater] after pater the mss insert some name resembling Imanuen- tins (which Heller calls facetum monstrum), but they spell it in such various ways and there is so little certainty attainable on the subject, as the name is not mentioned elsewhere, that the editors have perhaps done wisely in omitting it altogether.
ipse] ‘while he himself’. In Greek the two clauses would be opposed by pdv and d£; 6 p.h> irarrip	avrbs Si.
33 ab iniuria defendat] cf. 21 ab iniuria prohibitis: another possible construction would be defendat iniuriam Mandubracio, ‘ keep off injury for M.’, as in Hor. Carm. I. 17 igneam | defendit aestatem capellis | usque meis pluviosque ventos.
Page 29,
I iniuria Cassivellauni] subjective genitive, 4 from wrong inflicted by Cassivellaunus ’.
4 ad numerum] ‘ to the number required *.
Chap. 21.
6 Cenimagni] Lipsius wanted to resolve this into two names Iceni, Cangi, but Gliick qu. by Heller Philol. XVII. 281 defends the name and explains it as meaning locum longinquum tenentes. They are placed by Napoleon in the counties of Suffolk and Norfolk north of the Trinobantes. The Segontiaci appear to have inhabited Hampshire and Berkshire; the Ancalites, possibly parts of Berkshire and Middlesex, the name Ancastle is said to remain in one part of the town of Henley (Camden qu. by Long); the Bibroci Surrey and Sussex and parts of adjacent counties; the Cassi Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire; there is a hundred of Cassio or Cashio in Hertfordshire (Camden).
8 ex eo loco] Caesar has not spoken of any particular place lately; apparently he means the place where he crossed the Thames.
oppidum Cassivellauni] this is usually identified with St Albans, the Roman Verulamium.
convenerit] * has assembled ’; perf. subj. in orat. obi. corresponding to the perf. ind. in the actual words of the speakers.
autem] here, as often elsewhere, introduces a parenthetical remark,
4 now ’.
cum.,.munierunt] cum with the indicative denotes frequency, ‘whenever*. cf. iv. 33.
14 natura atque opere] so in 9; cf. 57 et loci natura et manu munitissimis castris ; in. 23.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. V.
Chap. 22.
2i	Cingetorix]	this Cingetorix must not be confounded with the Cinge
torix whose claim to the sovereignty of the Treveri was supported by Caesar V. 3. There was a famous Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix, cf. the names Cassivellaunus and Vercassivellaunus; the prefix ver has an intensive force. Nothing is known of the other three kings mentioned here; Carvilius is a Roman name.
24	it cum] ‘when they’; for the transposition of cum cf. IV. n.
30	hiemare...motus, neque] three mss have hiemem	motus	agere,
neque.
in continenti] contrary to his usual custom, which was to winter in Italy, cf. n. on v. 1.
aique id facile] ‘and saw that it (what remained of the summer) might easily be spun out’, i.e. that it would be easy to waste the remainder of the summer.
Page 30.
1 interdicit atque imperat] either verb would have done by itself; the two give additional force to the expression; ‘he puts a prohibition on C. and bids him not to do harm Cf. 58.
\
Chap. 23.
quae portaret) consecutive subjunctive, here ‘in a relative sentence restricting a general assertion’, R. § 1692, who qu. Cic. Div. I. 5 ex antiquissimis philosophis Xenophanes unus, qui deos esse diceret, divina- tionem funditus sustulit; * at least of those who affirmed the existence of the gods*: so here, ‘at least of those which carried troops’ or ‘which carried troops at least
desideraretur) ‘missed’, ‘lost’: cf. vii. 51; B. Al. 21.
quae...remitterentur) another consecutive subjunctive (R. § 1690, Kenn. § 206) but without the restrictive sense of the last.
et prioris commeatus) ‘both those of (that went on) the former journey, after disembarking their troops, and those which Labienus afterwards made ’: the words et prioris commeatus appear to stand for et quae prioris commeatus erant. Kraner takes commeatus to be the genitive after militibus, wrongly I think. It will be observed that though remitterentur, ‘ sent back: , is rightly used of the ships which returned from Gaul after disembarking their troops, it cannot be correctly used of ships made in Gaul and novy sent over to Britain for the first time; Caesar is writing a little hastily.
quas...curaverat) this clause, though in the middle of a subordinate sentence, contains an independent statement of the writer, hence the indicative: so the words et prioris commeatus if resolved, as I have just suggested they should be, would become et quae p. c. erant (indicative).
«2 caperent...reicermlur) the subjunctives depend on ut carried on from the beginning of the sentence sic accidit, uti etc. Nothing will increase
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIANOTES.
the learner’s knowledge of syntax more than a careful and minute investigation of a long and rather intricate sentence like this.
tempore] abl. of instrument: cf. VII. 11 diet tempore exclusus; 32 ipso anni tempore ad gerendum bellum vocaretur.
aequinoctium] Caesar was in Britain on Sept. 26th, for Cicero received a letter from his brother Quintus datas a litoribus Britanniae proximo {?) a d. Vi. Kal. Oct. Napoleon calls this the 21st of Sept., but he does not adopt the ordinary method of reckoning the dates of the Roman Calendar.
necessario angustius] ‘he necessarily placed (or ‘was obliged to place ’) his soldiers somewhat closely together ’. Beware of translating nec. aug. ‘more closely than was necessary’: a similar ambiguity occurs in vii. 16 longius necessario and elsewhere.
Chap. 24,
Samarobrivae] Amiens.
provmerat\ provenire is not infrequently used of animal or vegetable growth, hence proventus is used for ‘crop* or ‘produce’; Verg. G. II. 518, cf. B. G. vii. 29.
unam in Morinos] the researches conducted by able and experienced French officers have enabled Napoleon in his Histoire to determine with more or less precision most of the sites of these winter-quarters. Napoleon states, without however giving his reasons, that the legion under the command of Fabius was stationed at St. Pol in the department of Pas de Calais.
alteram in Nervios\ Caesar gave Q. Cicero (the orator’s brother) the privilege of choosing his own winter-quarters, cf. Cic. Att. iv. 1 (Wesenberg) hiberna legionis eligendi optio delata commodum, ut ad me scribit. Napoleon thinks that Charleroy on the Sambre in Hainault was the place selected, but Heller with good reason places the camp 4 or 5 miles N.N.E. of Charleroy, on the old road between Amiens and Tongres, which was afterwards called chauss^e de la reine Brunehaut. The chief stronghold of the Nervii was Bagacum, now Bavay.
tertiam in Esuvios] the Esuvii or Esubii were a tribe of no great importance dwelling within the limits of Normandy. According to Napoleon, the camp was at Seez in the department of Ome.
quartam in Remis] it is said that traces of a camp, which may have been that of Labienus, have been found near the village of Lavacherie, on the Ourthe, in the Duchy of Luxembourg, just above the 50th parallel of latitude.
tres in Belgis"] for Belgis we should probably read Bellovacis, suggested by Thomann, whom Kraner follows. The objection to Belgis is that the legions previously mentioned were, with one exception, stationed among the Belgic Gauls, and therefore it is not likely that Caesar, after specifying the tribes in whose territory the first four legions were quartered, would then add that three legions were quartered among the Belgae. It would be necessary, in that case, to understand the word96	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. [Comm. V.
Belgae in a narrower sense as denoting some special tribe of Belgic Gauls, but for this limitation of the name there is no authority. The chief objection to the alteration Bellovacis is that one of the three legions in question was stationed not among the Bellovaci but among the Ambiani, but this objection may be met, as Kraner suggests, by supposing the Ambiani to have been in some degree subject to their more powerful neighbours. The Bellovaci were situated between the sea coast and the Oise; their name remains in Beauvais. Of these three legions that under Crassus seems to have been stationed at Montdidier, about 25 miles S.E. of Amiens; that under Trebonius at Amiens (Samarobriva), and that under Plancus at Champlieu, near the confluence of the Oise and the Aisne.
quam proxime conscripserat] proxime, ‘last of all’; the legion in question seems to have the XIVth, levied in B.c. 57, cf. II. 2 (Nip- perdey).
cohortes quinque in Eburones] Caesar then had in Gaul eight-and-a- half legions. For the Eburones cf. IV. 6: these troops were quartered at Aduatuca (Tongres).
32 Ambiorigis et Catuvolci] they shared the sovereignty equally between them, cf. VI. 31 Catuvolcus rex dimidiae partis Eburonum.
Page 31.
milibus passuum centum continebantur] the meaning of this has been disputed. Schneider, Long, and Kraner say ‘ no camp was more than 100 miles from any other camp ’, but this statement would be inaccurate, for Samarobriva and Aduatuca (the two best identified positions) are considerably over 100 miles apart. Goler explains the words to mean that each camp was at the most 100 miles from the nearest camp; lastly, according to Napoleon, Caesar means that all the camps were contained within a circle with radius of 100 miles. Of these three explanations the first alone seems to suit the form of expression used by Caesar, but if we accept it we must suppose either that Caesar was misinformed as to the distance between the camps, or that some higher numeral than 100 originally stood in the text.
Chap. 25.
Carnutibus] the territory of the Carnutes was considered to be the centre of Gaul, vi. 13. Their chief town Cenabum, afterwards called civitas Aurelianorum, is the modem Orleans.
Tasgetius] the name Tasgiitius has been found on a Gallic medal (Long).
cuius] so two inferior mss : the rest have huius.
11	singulari... usus] cf. a somewhat similar expression in vii. 76 huius
opera Commii fideli atque utili erat usus Caesar.
inimici] most MSS have inimicis and et iis auctoribus; the original inimici became altered to inimicis in consequence of the following multis,
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAand this change necessitated the insertion of et iis before auctoribus. The correction is due to Schneider.
cum interfecerunf\ the preceding hunc is the object of interfecerunt and cum is therefore unnecessary; it may be due to a copyist who thought that hunc agreed with annum and that an accusative after interfecerunt was therefore required. It is not however necessarily inadmissible, cf. Liv. 1. 19 urbem novam, conditam vi et armis, iure eam legibusque ac moribus de integro condere parat, and other exx. given by Drager Hist. Synt. I. § -27.
f 5	pertinebat] ea res is the subject.
Belgio] Belgium here as in 12 means the whole country occupied by
the Belgic Gauls and not any particular part of that country.
€7	cognoverat] ‘by whose deed he had (as a fact) ascertained that T. was
slain*: the indicative should be noticed; two MSS have cognoverit, but if the subjunctive had been used, as it of course might have been, the pluperfect would probably have been preferred.
legatis quaestoreque] this is Nipperdey*s correction for the mss reading legatis quaestoribusque, which cannot be right because Caesar had only one quaestor in Gaul, M. Crassus, 24: perhaps it would be better with Vielhaber, whom Kraner follows, to omit the words altogether as a late interpolation. The duties of the quaestor were chiefly financial.
21	hibernis] the occurrence of the word so soon after hiberna is a little
objectionable; Vielhaber and Kraner propose to omit it.
Chap. 26.
diebus xv quibus\ cf. IV. 18.
initium ortum est] this rather pleonastic expression is common in Tacitus, cf. Hist. I. 39 initio caedis orto, where Heraeus qu. Terence Hec. 351 unde ortumst initium irae and Cic. p. Cluent. 180 hoc initio suspicionis orto. From Caesar Kraner qu. B. C. I. 35, III. 94, and initium nascitur from B. C. in. 20, B. G. vui. 6.
praesto fuissent] * had met ’.
Treveri] gen. sing, from Trever.
27	oppugnatum venerunt] the supine in um after venio and similar verbs
is common: the learner should remember that the simple infinitive after venire etc. is only found in poetry and in late prose; cf. Verg. A. 1. 527 Libycos populare penates venimus. Tr. ‘came to the- camp, to attack
vallum]	the rampart surrounding their camp.
desperata re\ ‘despairing of success*, ‘regarding the case as hope* less*.
conclamaverunt uti] conclamaverunt implies some such idea as postulaverunt or flagitaverunt, hence the uti; cf. R. § 1648.
aliqui\ aliquis is more usual: the forms in -qui are generally regarded98	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. [Comm. V.
as adjectival; if this be so, the present passage affords an exception. Cf. Kenn. § 68.
vellent] the verbs in the subordinate clauses are in the imperfect, prodiret, vellent, sperarent, because of the past tense of the main verb conclamaverunt; habere is present because it expresses something that was contemporaneous with the action of the main verb, ‘ they exclaimed that they have something to say\ in English we should be inclined to substitute *had’ for * have’, making it a past tense.
quibus rebus] ‘whereby’, ‘by which means*.
Chap. 27, Page 32.
stipendio] we know nothing from other sources of this payment of tribute by the Eburones to the Aduatuci.
Aduatucis] the Aduatuci were situated on the Meuse in a part of the province of Namur.
ei ] notice ei used here of the speaker Ambiorix himself, while above in plurimum ei confiteri it is used of the person of whom he is speaking, viz.
Caesar. This use of the demonstrative for the reflexive pronoun seems to be due to the writer’s forgetting for a moment that, in representing another person’s words in oratio obliqua, one ought to use the reflexive pronoun where that person is made to speak of himself. In English ‘ he ’ serves for the reflexive as well as for the demonstrative pronoun.
obsidum numero] ‘in the number of hostages’, ‘as hostages’, almost
like obsidum loco: in numero obsidum might have been used; cf. vi. 23 in desertorum numero ducuntur.	Nothing has been said previously
about the service rendered by Caesar to Ambiorix.
fecerit\ ‘has done’, representing^/ in or. recta.
civitati]	after speaking of himself Ambiorix goes on to speak of the
state; hence the emphatic position of civitati and the use of porro ‘furthermore’.
imperitus rerum\ ‘ inexperienced ’: cf. I. 44 non se tam barbarum neque tam imperitum esse rerum: without renim in I. 40 homities barbaros atque imperitos, so also VI. 10.
alterae] this form of the dative should be noticed : Kraner qu. the dative nullo from B. G. VI. 13 ; B. C. II. 7 ; add the dative toto vn. 89 ; VIII. 34; R. § 372.
potuisse\ this represents potuerunt in or. recta ; one would rather have expected posse representing possunt.
p'o pietatel ‘on ground of duty’: pietas here almost = patriotism.
haberel he say$ that he now takes into account his obligation for Caesar’s kindnesses.
27 ipsorurk esse consilium] * it is for you to consider ’. With velintne one must rnen$ally .supply an non or necne to complete the construction.
quotkcum facidt] in or. recta this would be : quod cum facio, et civitati
consulo, quod hibernis levatur, et Caesari...refero.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGIfChap. 28, Page 33.
7 eos] those who took part in the consilium.
9 primorum ordinum centuriones] the highest in rank of the six centurions of each cohort was. advanced to the command of the cohort; then the ten centurions in command of the several cohorts were called primorum ordinum centuriones ox simply primi ordines as in 30 (Kraner).
iniussu]	this is an abnormal compound formed on the analogy of
iussu ; no other case but the ablative occurs.
munitis hibernis] not iin fortified winter-quarters’, but abl. abs. ‘when (or ‘provided that’) the winter-quarters are fortified’.
rem esse testimonio quod] the rem is the whole clause quod.. .sustinuerint; ‘this circumstance serves for a proof, viz., the fact that they sustained’: cf. above hac re permovebantur quod...vix erat credendum ‘they were influenced by this consideration, viz., that it was scarcely to be believed ’. The verb sustinuerint is subjunctive because the sentence is a subordinate clause in or. obliqua: it corresponds to sustinuimus in the actual language of the speaker.
ultro] something like our ‘into the bargain’: they not only sustained the attack but also inflicted many wounds.
16 quid esse'] quid is accusative. All rhetorical questions, i.e. all questions that do not require any particular answer, are expressed in or. obliqua by the acc. and infin. : all questions in the second person which would naturally require an answer are expressed in or. obliqua by the subjunctive; e. g. quid facis in or. recta become in or. obliqua rogavit eum quid faceret. Cf. Kenn. § 230, R. c. xxiv. A few MSS have esset; cf. n. on 29 habere.
Chap. 29.
sero] ‘too late*.
brevem] ‘the opportunity for deliberation was short’; occasion Kcupos.
aliter] ‘otherwise’; except on the sup longer in Gaul.
fuisse capturos] ‘would have been clause I believe esse after venturos to b 32. Madvig L. G. § 409 obs. quotin capturos corresponds to venissent i venirent.
25 spectare] supply se as with arbitn (consider) the advice of the enemy, but alluding to auctore hoste in 28.
subesse] ‘was near’, cf. 23 aequinoctium
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. V,
27 ardere] ‘Gaul brought under the sway of the Roman people, her former military glory extinguished, was ablaze at all the indignities she had received*, contum. acc. is abl. of attendant circumstances or abl. abs., and not dependent on ardere.
quis...per suaderet?] this question might have been put in the acc. and infin., quem sibi persuadere, ox persuasurum? as below Cottae consilium quern habere exitum? Cf. n. on 28.
ad consilium descendisse] this use of descendere is derived from its constant employment in the phrases descendere in forum, in arenam etc., which are explained by the fact that the forum and arena were on a low level; hence by a slight extension of meaning descendere in or ad certa- men (literally ‘to go down for the purpose of* or ‘to take part in a contest*) came to denote generally ‘to engage in (or enter upon) a contest’, and by a still further extension of the usage you could say, as here, descendere ad consilium ‘to have recourse to a plan’, cf. vil. 33 ad vim atque arma descenderent where see note; vi. 16.
si nihil esset durius] ‘if it were nothing very serious*.
Page 34.
positam] cf. VII. 40 res posita in celeritate videbatur : V. 34 omnem spem salutis in virtute ponebant.
quem habere exitum] I doubtfully follow Dinter, Kraner, Frigell in writing habere against the authority of the MSS which have haberet.
fames esset timenda] Caesar might have written famem esse timendam, making the clause in quo etc. independent, instead of, as it now is, more or less subordinate to the previous clause.
Chap. 30
primisque ordinibus] cf. n. on 28.
vincite] ‘have your way’- K. qu. Ov. Met. vm. 508 male vincetis, sed vincite, fratres.
neque is sum] 41 am not the man to be more seriously alarmed than the rest of you by the risk of death ’.
non...intereant] ‘and would not perish’, ‘instead of perishing*.
Chap. 31.
16	si modo] ‘if only all agree in approving the same course*.
dat manus] ‘gives in’; the expression is chiefly found in poetry;
brachia dare occurs in Propert. v. 3. 12, brachia praebere in Ov. Her. vii. 126. permotus ‘influenced*, ‘overcome* by the arguments of the opposite party.
cum...circumspiceret] we should translate this by a present participle, ‘each soldier gazing around*.
instrumento] ‘furniture*.
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGININOTES.
omnia...augeatur] the sense seems to be: ‘every thing is thought of to
prove that staying is not unaccompanied by danger, and that the danger is further increased by the labour and watching of the troops’: the danger that is said to be increased by the fatigue of the soldiers is undoubtedly the danger of staying and not the danger of going, as some understand. Mr Long explains the passage rightly, I think. However, there is something unsatisfactory about it in the place it now occupies, and, to remedy this, some would transpose it to follow perducitur.
ut quibus esset persuasum] ‘like men persuaded’.
Ambiorige] Tittler without adequate reason proposes to omit the name.
Chap. 32.
31 a milibus passuum circiter duobus] ‘about two miles off’. 33 convallem] ill. 20; not elsewhere in Caesar (Kraner).
Chap. 33, Page 35.
qui nihil providisset'] qui is no doubt causal, as Kraner says; ‘inasmuch as he had foreseen nothing’. Cf. below at Cotta qui cogitas set.
concursare] ‘to run about’: concursare often has this meaning, concurrere never.
ut]—ita ut; cf. 15, 40.
in ipso negotio] ‘at the last moment’ would be a fair rendering of this. In Greek kv aur£ ry kpy(f.
9 non fuisset] non in this position is scarcely represented adequately by the simple negative ‘not’: tr. here ‘had refused to be’: cf. 21 non tulerunt ‘failed to endure’, ‘could not endure*.
<2 omnia obire] ‘perform every duty’; cf. Liv. xxi. 8 oppidani ad omnia tuenda atque obeunda multifariam distineri coepti sunt. facile is an almost certain correction of the MSS facere; Frigell omits the word altogether, considering facere to be a marginal explanation of obire.
13	iusseruntpronuntiare] ‘bade (the officers) give orders’: the accusative
of the person commanded is sometimes omitted in English after the verb
t* in orbem consisterent] ‘form in a circle’. This was done by the Roman soldiers who were attacked by the Morini, IV. 27. In modem times troops form in a square.
30 quaeque] this has better MSS authority than quae. Schneider points out that the sentence may be considered as consisting of two members, (i) milites...properaret, (ii) clamore...complerentur; (i) is further subdivided into two parts, the second connected with the first by que. Thus we avoid the solecism of three co-ordinate clauses with a copula attached to the second alone. On this subject cf. R. §§ 2201—2203.
fletu] when we read of soldiers weeping it should be remembered that the southern nations of Europe are naturally more emotional in character
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAthan the northern, and that the tendency of modem education and habits of thought is to check all outward expression of strong feeling, whether in the way of joy or grief.
Chap. 34.
pronuntiare {usserunt] cf. 33; below we find the passive construction pronuntiari Met.
reliquissent] in or. recta reliquerint, ‘to you belongs whatever he Romans shall have left’.
proinde] ‘wherefore’, frequently used in exhortations: existimarent represents existimate in or. recta. With omnia in victoria posita cf. below spem salutis in virtute ponebant and 29.
erant...nostri] I have given the mss reading of this very difficult passage; the only variation is that two MSS join nostri with the following sentence. Heller and Vielhaber, followed by Kraner, write studio for numero, and this is the best suggestion that has been made, though Heller (Phil. XXXI. 542) does not satisfactorily explain how numero came to usurp the place of studio.
cedant] the ut of the previous line must be supplied with this verb. Kraner qu. two exactly similar passages, B.G. 11. 21, ut retinerent neu perturbarentur...hostiumque...sustinerent; and B. C. III. 92 ut...ex- ciperent neve.. moverent aciemque...paterentur.
Page 36.
levitate armorum] ‘by reason of the lightness of their arms : levitas is more often used in its metaphorical sense.
insequanturJ ut must be again supplied with this verb from the beginning of the sentence; the clause lev itate...posse is parenthetical; Kr. encloses it in brackets.
Chap. 35.
cum...excesserat] cum ‘whenever’: cf. n. on IV. 17 : so below cum...
coeperant.
eam partem] the gap in the ranks of the orbis left by the absence of the cohort.
locum...locus] this repetition of locus in a different sense from the preceding is a mark of hasty writing : cf. vn. 20 recipientem...recipiat.
r5 primum pilum duxerat] each ordo or century of the triarii was called pilus: hence Balventius had been centurion of the first century and consequently of the first cohort (cf. n. on 28) of the triarii. Before the introduction by Marius of the cohort system the army was arranged in order of battle in three lines, the first being called hastati, the second principes, the third triarii: these last, consisting of the bravest and most experienced troops, would not be called into action unless the two first lines were broken through, hence arose the proverbial expression res ad triarios
Digitized by GoogleNOTES.
raft/. Caesar says that Balventius had held his command of the first cohort the previous year; by this it may be implied that he was now emeritus though continuing to serve with the legion as an evocatus.
eiusdem ordinis] he had also the command of a primus pilus. The centurion commanding a primus pilus was himself sometimes called primus pilus or more briefly primipilus.
in adversum os\ ‘right in the face’. B. C. ill. 99gladio in os adversum xoniecto; Liv. xxi. 7 has adversum femur ictus.
Chap. 36.
si velit] the actual words of Ambiorix were something as follows: 4 If Titurius wishes to speak with me, he may do so : I hope that it is possible for him to gain his request from the host as far as the safety of his troops is concerned: no harm shall be done to himself, and to that I pledge my word*.
27. si videatur] ‘if it seems good to him,—if he thinks fit.*
sperare] in or. recta: ‘I hope that my (or ‘our1) request about my (or ‘our’) own safety and that of the soldiers can be gained from him* (Ambiorix).
armatum] Cotta refused to trust himself in the presence of an armed foe, conscious that treachery was intended.
Chap. 37.
in praesentia] ‘at the time*
tribunos militum] as there were 6 tribuni militum to a legion and Cotta and Sabinus had a legion and a half under their command, there were probably 9 tribuni militum in the army, of whom Titurius took with him those who happened to be on the spot.
Page 37.
5 ululatum] Kr. qu. Liv. V. 37. nata in vanos tumultus gens (Gallorum) truci cantu clamoribusque variis horrendo cuncta compleverunt sono. Cf. VII. 80 Galli...clamore et ululatu suorum animos confirmabant.
13	lapsi] this has better MSS authority than elapsi which is adopted by
Schneider, Heller and Kraner, perhaps rightly. Assuming that Cotta’s headquarters were at Tongres (Aduatuca) Napoleon shows that the site of the battle may be accurately determined. About two miles (cf. 32) to the S. W. of Tongres is a long valley through which runs a small river called the Geer. This route would probably be equally suitable for the Romans, whether they proposed joining Cicero at Charleroy or Labienus at Lavacherie, and we may fairly assume that it was in this valley, somewhere near the village of Lowaige, that they were surprised by the barbarians, who had been lying in wait in the woods that covered the hills on either side.
Digitized by GOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. V.
Chap. 38.
16	Aduatucos]	it must be remembered that Aduatuca Tungrorum (Ton-
gres), where Cotta was encamped, was in the territory of the Eburones and not in that of the Aduatuci.
eius] this clause contains an independent statement of Caesar’s, and therefore he uses eius; he might have written suo regno, regarding the matter from Ambiorix’s point of view.
intcrmittif\ cf. n nocturnis temporibus intermissis; 40 nulla pars nocturni temporis intermittitur.
*20	sui liberandi\ the pronoun, though representing the plural object of
liberandi, is apparently regarded by the writer as the gen. sing, of the possessive suus agreeing with liberandi. Drager Hist. Synt. 11 § 597 qu. the following exx. from Caesar: III. 4, 6, IV. 13, 34, v. 38, VI. 9, 37, vii. 50, 80, in which, the first alone excepted, sui strictly represents the acc. pi. se: in B. Af. 47 we find milites se circumspiciendi non habebant facultatem, but this usage does not occur in Caesar.
legionem...interfici]	interjicere is more often used with reference to
individuals than to a body of men as here.
Chap. 39.
Ceutrones]	to be distinguished from the people of the same name men
tioned in I. 10. The MSS here (and some there) have Centrones; Kraner however prefers Ceutrones. The 0 is short as in Redones, Santones, Pictones, Lingones Their name may survive in Courtray (Brugge) in W. Flanders.
Grudios] these people are said to have inhabited part of E. Flanders near Oudenarde. The Levaci dwelt near Lovendeghem near Gent or near Lowen (Louvain). The Pleumoxii may have left a trace of their name in the town of Moxhe on the Mehaigne in W. Flanders. The Geidumni probably belonged to the same neighbourhood, but their exact locality is unknown. (From Kraner.)
qui...discessissent] there is a slight causal sense in qui, hence the subjunctive (their going into the woods was the reason of their being cut off): or the mood might be explained by the consecutive use of qui which follows on, and carries out the sense of, the words nonnulli milites which belong to a subordinate clause ut interciperentur.
munitionis causa] ‘for the sake of fortification’, i.e. with the object of getting timber for fortifying the camp.
Page 38.
1	magna manu] these words must be taken with oppugnare incipiunt.
3	vallum conscendunt] they mount the rampart or earthwork surrounding
the camp: cf. 26 cum celeriter nostri arma cepissent vallumque ascendissent. Notice the omission of the copula, by which the narrative is made more vivid, cf. 40 castra oppugnant, fossam complent.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA





































DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. V.
27	egerat] 4 had treated of’.
29 Ambiorigem ostentant] 4 they point to Ambiorix ’ who was present with them, cf. 38.
Page 39.
licere per se] 4 may as far as they are concerned *: in or. recta: licet vobis per nos etc. ‘ as far as we are concerned you may depart in safety . incolumibus is attracted into the case of illis ; a similar usage is found in Greek, cf. Xen. Anab. I. 2 § 1 wapayybWet t$ KXeapxv \ap6vTi jjicetp arparevpa but a few lines below rjiceiv vapayybXXei XcqSbvra robs &v5pat, where see Mr Pretor’s note (Pitt Press Series).
ab hoste armato] the dignity of the Romans would not suffer them to have dealings with armed foes: compare the determination of Cotta not to go ad armatum hostem in 36, though in that case it is not quite clear whether it was the natural pride of a Roman that prevented him from accompanying Sabinus to confer with the enemy, or a fear of treachery; probably the latter.
utantur] the imperfect subjunctive is generally used to represent an imperative in or recta, 4but the present may be retained, if the first governing verb is the historical present, or if the narrative is changed to the historical present’, Madvig L. G. § 404 who qu. B. C. vn. 64 aequo modo animo sua ipsi frumenta corrumpant aedificiaque incendant: in Liv. xxi. 30 (end) both tenses are found in the same sentence proinde aut cederent animo...aut itineris finem sperent.
sperare] supply se; 4 he said that he hoped
Chap. 42.
ab hac spe repulsi] cf. Cic. Orat. 36 non sum ab hoc conatu repulsus.
pedum ix] Caesar gives the height of the rampart and the width from edge to edge of the fosse; the latter would of course be much less than 15 feet wide at the bottom.
quos de] all MSS without exception have quosdam; in place of habebant some inferior Mss have nancti or nacti. It is difficult to choose between quos...habebant and quosdam...nancti Frigell ingeniously, but, I think, wrongly, reads quos clam habebant. Lastly Madvig proposes quod quosdam...habebant, allowing also the probability of quosdam... nacti.
docebantur] 4they used to get instruction’.
nulla copia] abl. of attendant circumstances; ‘there being no supply of tools’.
quae esset] the best mss have esset, but sunt is found in two mss, and this seems to point to what I believe to be the true reading, essent; quae then will be neut. pi., referring to ferramenta; if esset be retained quae must be fern. sing, referring to copia.
circumcidere] ‘cut around*, i. e. ‘cut into shape’, ‘cut out’.
nitebantur] this, probably the right reading, is only found in two
GoogleNOTES.
MSS: a few have cogebantur, which would make good sense; the rest and the best have videbantur, which makes no sense. [Heller’s energetic defence of videbantur in the Philologus xxxi. 513 cannot be considered as satisfactory.]
milium passuum xv in circuitu munitionem] in the place of passuum the best MSS have p, which may stand for either passuum or pedum ; the rest have pedum; all agree in the number xv, though the inferior 'mss curiously enough add decern before milium. It seems scarcely credible that the circuit of line of investment should have measured 15 Roman or I3f English miles, and I incline to the opinion of Napoleon, Heller and Long that pedum should be read; 15000 ft. would be approximately af miles. Goler substitutes x for xv, thinking that the lines may have been 10 miles in circuit. Nipperdey, Frigell and Kraner retain the reading of the text.
falces]	scythe-shaped hooks used for loosening or pulling away the
stone or other material of a wall. They seem to have been fixed in the ends of beams. Cf. B. C. ill. 14; B. G. vii. 22.
testudines] testudo, xeX&W> is a general term for any construction or appliance for sheltering a storming party from the missiles of the besieged ; it includes vineae, musculi, cuniculi etc. It is also used for an improvised cover of shields as in 9, where see note.
Chap. 43.
ferventes fusili ex argilla glandes] acorn-shaped bolts or bullets made of kneaded clay and heated red hot. It is said that when thrown they retain sufficient heat to ignite straw. Perhaps, as Napoleon suggests, small coal was mixed with the clay. One would think that the leathern slings from which they were thrown must have soon been burnt through and rendered useless.
fervefacta iacula] arrows wrapped round with inflammable material. Cf. Livy’s account (xxi. 8) of the Saguntine phalarica which was bound round with tow steeped in pitch.
casas] as the Romans were in winter-quarters they required more shelter than could be afforded by mere tentoria made of pelles, cf. ill. 29 sub pellibus ‘under canvas’. These casae were huts made of boards and thatched with straw, after the Gallic fashion, as Caesar says.
ignem comprehenderunt] * caught fire ’.
distulerunt] sc. ignem.
explorata] a favourite word with Caesar: ‘assured’: cf. vn. 15, 20, 52.
agere] ‘move up*. The turres ambulatoriae or mobiles were mounted on wheels or rollers.
26 praesentia animi] not quite ‘presence of mind*, but rather ‘unfailing resolution*. Cf. Cicero’s exhortation to the jury adeste animis, iudices, p. Mil. § 4.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. V.
ut se constipaverant] ‘just as they had massed themselves1, i. e. they fell just as they were, just as they stood. For this use of ut cf. vn. 46 Teutomatus subito oppressus, ut meridie conquieverat ‘just as he had gone to rest’; the phrase ‘just as’ is of course not used here in the sense of ‘as soon as’, but of ‘exactly as*, sub ipso vallo ‘under the very rampart’.
non dabant] ‘wouldnot give’: the position of the negative adds to its emphasis; cf. 33 auctor non fuisset.
Chap. 44.
qui primis] a few mss insert iam after qui: for the primi ordines cf. 28.
(o appropinquarent] the force of the subjunctive with qui may be best expressed by translating, ‘ such that they were close upon attaining the first post
quinam] so 3 of the best MSS; others have quisnam or quisnam alteri or uter alteri; these are all attempts to explain quinam, for it is somewhat irregular for qui to be used where either of two persons is meant. Kr. qu. B. C. I. 66 qui prior has angustias occupaverit, with which contrast 70 utri prius angustias inontesque occuparent. Several exx. from Livy are given by Drager. Kr. compares the Greek use of r/s where irbrepos might have been expected, as in Xen. Cyr. 1. 3. 17. At the end of the chapter we find the usual diction uter utri virtute anteferendus videretur.
summis] this goes with simultatibus ‘with the keenest emulation’; de locis ‘for the different posts*. The sentence reads rather awkwardly; if any change is needed one might suggest omnibusque quotannis, taking omnibus with simultatibus, and de locis summis together.
tuae probandae virtutis exspectas] a probable correction due chiefly to Aldus Manutius; the mss have pro laude and a few other variations; for the corruption of the original probandae into pro laude one may perhaps compare Cic. Ep. Q. Fr. 11. 13 where the MSS have Blandenonne probably a corruption of Laude nonis. Frigell still reads tuae pro laude virtutis spectas.
extra munitiones] so the inferior mss ; the others have for the most part the senseless ex castris munitiones (or munitionesque). Possibly Caesar wrote extra castra munitionesque or extra castrorum munitiones. Cf. 48 intra munitionem castroru7n.
quaque pars] here again there are variations of reading, most mss having parte or parti; this seems due to a desire on the part of the copy-
. ists to make the word agree with quaque, which they did not understand to be an adverb of place. Perhaps eo or in earn should be inserted before irrumpit.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINICapp. 43—45]
c$ ne Vorenus quideni\ ‘nor (does) Vorenus either*, tum is only found in a few mss, and should perhaps be omitted; it is noteworthy that two of the mss which insert it here omit it before mediocri; one might imagine that in the MS from which they copied it had been accidentally omitted before mediocri in consequence of the last syllable of subsequitut and the m of mediocri, and had afterwards been supplied in the margin, and that the copyist then inserted it in the text at random.
21 quo...hunc] quo and hunc both referto the same person, Kr. cf. iv. 21 quibus auditis...eos domum remittit (but there quibus aud. may be neuter). Caesar might well have written quem percussum et exanimatum scutis protegunt, but by arranging the sentence as it now stands he brings out more sharply the antithesis between the fallen friend {hunc) and the foe {hostem) whom they proceed to attack.
24	avertit] ‘this mischance disarranges (moves aside) his scabbard’.
26	succurrit]	succurrere, subvenire to come to aid, submittere to send aid,
cf. subsidium ; sub in these compounds means ‘up to*, hence subsequi ‘to follow up', ‘follow close upon*.
illum veruto arbitrantur occisum] here again the MSS variations are hopeless. I adopt Kraner’s reading, which is found (with the last two words transposed) in a very late MS. Frigell has illum vero opinantur occisum, vero being found in most MSS.
gladio Vorenus] so the best MSS; two have Vorenus gladiatorem comminus gerit I
delectus] ‘being carried*, i.e. in the ardour of pursuit, not deiectus ab hoste (Long and Kraner). concidit is undoubtedly right; Frigell has occidit, through inadvertence I imagine.
rursus] ‘in turn*.
Page 41.
sic] is sic the antecedent of ut, ‘Fortune so turned...that*, or is sic ‘thus’ and ut equivalent to ita ut, ‘thus did Fortune change about their luck, so that’? I think the latter, and so Schneider takes it.
contentione et certamine] ‘rivalry and emulation’, or is certamine used of the actual contest with the enemy ?
versavit] ‘varied the luck’ of each. The attentive reader will discern in the language of this little episode some trace of the enthusiasm and delight with which Caesar described it.
Chap. 45.
et maxi?ne]=et maxime quidem cf. 14 (Kraner): ‘and that chiefly because’.
a prima obsidione] ‘from the beginning of the blockade’, i.e. at the beginning of it.
in iaculo] the letter may have been concealed in the shaft of the spear, yet illigatas would seem to imply that it was bound round or tied to it.
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIno	DE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. V.
but in that case there would be great chance of detection. Kraner suggests sagulo.
ad Caesarem] Caesar would probably hear for the first time from the messengers of the disasters that had befallen Cotta and Sabinus. Suetonius says of Caesar that diligebat usque adeo milites ut audita clade Tituriana barbam capillumque summis erit nec ante demserit quam vindicas set.
Chap. 46.
Caesar]	Caesar was no doubt still at Samarobriva, whither he had
summoned the conference of the Gallic tribes, 24. Crassus, according to Napoleon, was at Montdidier, which would be about 25 miles from Amiens.
cum nuntio] ‘ immediately on the receipt of the intelligence.*
Fabiuni] at St Pol, (Napoleon). Others suppose that he was stationed at Montreuil or Therouanne.
Atrebatum] this form of the genitive has more authority than Atre- batium.
qua sibi scit iter] this very probable correction of the confused readings of the mss is due to Heller. Caesar knew that in order to reach Cicero he would have to pass through the lands of the Atrebates, at least across their Southern border.
Labieno] at Lavacherie (Napoleon: cf. 24).
posset] two MSS have possit, but posset is unobjectionable, scribit being an historical present. Contrast with this passage 48 si adire non possit monet ut, etc. The expression reip. commodo facere occurs in I. 35, vi. 33. commodo is ablative.
veniat] subjunctive after ut omitted: ‘he writes instructions to Labienus to come \
26 ex proximis hibernis] it is not clear what winter-quarters these are: if those of M. Crassus at Montdidier why did not Caesar mention the cavalry at the same time that he speaks of sending to Crassus for the legion (cf. above iubet media nocte etc.)? If those of Trebonius at Samarobriva why call them proximis when Caesar was himself to all appearance in them and with Trebonius ? Perhaps we may infer from 53 cum tribus legionibus circum Samarobrivam trinis hibernis hiemare constituit that the camp of Trebonius was outside the town at this time, and therefore, if Caesar were residing in the town he might use the expression proxima hiberna.
Chap. 47.
Crassum Samarobrivae praeficit] Caesar had left before Crassus arrived, hence we must suppose that Caesar left instructions for Crassus, bidding him remain in charge of Samarobriva. The legion assigned to Crassus must be the legion that Crassus brought with him. Schneider thinks that Caesar took with him the legion brought by Crassus, and left Crassus in charge of the legion previously under the command of
Digitized by GOOglCCapp. 45— 48]	NOTES.	t	t	i
Labienus; but how could this be when Caesar started before Crassus arrived ?
relinquebat] * he was leaving*.
occurrit] assuming that Caesar was marching from Amiens to Char- leroy, and Fabius from St Pol to Charleroy, and knowing that Fabius was told to meet Caesar in the territory of the Atrebates, we may fairly suppose that they met somewhere near Cambray.
Page 42.
veritus ne si] si is found in 4 mss, the rest and best omit it. Frigell inserts it after fugae thinking that the si of similem caused it to fall out, but surely it would be out of its proper position there. Nipperdey retaining si as in the text omits ne, reading ut hostium with many good mss. For the idea cf. 53, vii. 43 ne profectio nata ab timore defectionis similis fugae videretur. Schneider qu. besides II. 11 fecerunt ut consimilis fugae profectio videretur, and vi. 7 his rebus fugae similem profectionem efficit. Cf. 53 end.
4 praesertim quos sciret] * especially as he knew that the/.
copias] notice the double genitive after copias (1) Treverorum, the forces of the Treveri, (2) peditatus equitatusque, forces consisting in infantry and cavalry: tr. ‘the infantry and cavalry forces of the Treveri’. The order peditatus equitatusque is better supported than equitatus peditatusque adopted by Kraner.
tria m. p. longe ab] 4 at a distance of 3 miles from*.
Chap. 48.
opinione trium legionum delectus] lit. * cast down from his idea about three legions’, i.e. ‘disappointed in his expectation of three legions’, cf. 1. 8 Helvetii ea spe deiecti 4 foiled of this hope *: Vergil (Aen. III. 317) ventures on deiectam coniuge tanto 4 disappointed of so great a husband’.
ad duas redierat] ‘ had been reduced to two*.
in celeritate ponebat] cf. 29.
Graecis conscriptam litteris] it has been much disputed whether Caesar wrote his message in the Greek language or whether he wrote it in the Latin language but in Greek characters. So Caesar says of the Druids in Gaul graecis litteris utuntur; so too among the Helvetii there were found certain records litteris Graecis confectae, 1. 29. I believe that here, at all events, it means simply in Greek characters. Dion Cassius says (XL. 9) ry Kuctpcovt ttavQ* 6<ra rjf3ov\rj0i) iWrjptCTl iirt- oreikep.
amentum] the thong of the javelin.
scribit] according to Polyaenus the words were Oappeiv, (HoyOetap itp<xr5£xov'
23 biduo] the accusative is generally used to express duration of time. For the ablative cf. Pliny Xiv. T45, Pi so biduo duabusque noctibus per-
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. V.
potationem continuavit (qu. by Roby § 1184), B. G. I. 26 eaque tota noctt continenter ierunt; Sali. Iug. 54 quatriduo moratus and other exx. qu. by Drager, H. S. 1. 224,
24 dempta] the omission of the copula is noticeable.
perlectani] ‘ after reading it through ’.
27	dubitationem adventus]	‘all doubt about the arrival’.
Chap. 49.
haec erant armata] there were doubtless a great number of unarmed
or insufficiently armed Gauls accompanying the Gallic army; hence Caesar says that the number in arms was about 60000, surely an exaggerated estimate. All MSS but one (which has haec) have haec eram armatae.
31 repetit] undoubtedly right, though all the good MSS have repperit.
Page 43.
convertisse]	hostes is the subject and multitudinem the object of the
verb.
Caesar] for the position of the nom. Caesar in the middle of the abl
abs. cf. vii. 1 principes, 6 Caesar.
5 trans vallem] one must be careful not to take these words with progressus , because Caesar had not crossed the river as we find from the next chapter. Napoleon fixes the scene of the battle on the banks of the small river Haine near the village of Camieres, about 8 miles W. of Charleroy. Goler, who believes that Cicero was encamped at Namur, makes the valley of the Orneau, about 9 miles W. of Namur, the locality of the battle.
turn] tamen is found in some early editions though it has no ms authority. I prefer it to the ordinary reading tuin which seems destitute of sense.
obsidione liberatum] liberare is sometimes followed by ab or ex.
remittendum de] cf. B.C. HI. 17 si hoc sibi remitti vellent remitterent ipsi de maritimis custodiis ‘let them relax somewhat of their vigilance by sea’. The following constructions of this verb should be remembered: remittere diligentiam, aliquid de (or ex) diligentia, aliquid diligentiae.
consedit...communit] notice the change of tense.
vix hominum] ‘consisting of scarcely 7000 men’. On the strength of the legion cf. n. on iv. 22.
angustiis viarum] ‘by making the streets of the camp narrow’ Kraner qu. from Frontinus metum simulavit militesgue in castris quae arctiora solito industria fecerat tenuit.
15 valles] some mss have vallem transire. It is impossible to choose
' between the two readings.
Original fr
UNIVERSITY OF VChap. 50.
si forte...posset] Caesar wanted to draw the Gauls across the river to his own side of the valley (citra vallem). The order of the sentence is Caesar (continebat se) ut ..contenderet, si forte...posset.
in suum locum] Schneider and Kraner are perhaps right in saying that suus signifies rather more than ‘his*, and means ‘favourable to himself*. Compare the occasional use of Ircpos in the sense of ‘ adverse*.
27 quam niaxime] ‘ orders that there should be as much running about as possible, and that everything should be done with a semblance of fear*.
Chap. 51.
nostris...deductis] abl. abs. The Romans were all summoned within the camp, and not even (etiam) allowed to mount and man the ramparts.
Page 44.
in speciem] 1 for show*. Cf. I. 51 ut ad speciem alariis uteretur. Liv. XXI. 32 pluribus ignibus quam pro numero manentium in speciem factis. This was done to make the Gauls believe that the Romans were too weak to venture on a sortie, and had resolved to shut themselves up in their entrenchments.
ea] * by that way*.
videbantur] ‘seemed (to themselves) unable’, i.e. thought they were unable’, cf. vn. 20.
in fugam dat] ‘ puts to flight*, this sense of dare is probably to be ex-
dare, one meaning ‘ to give’ and connected with the corresponding Greek word SlSopcu, the other meaning ‘to set’ or ‘place’ and connected with the root 8e found in rldy/it. This supposition explains the meaning of the various compounds, abdo ‘ put away*, ‘hide’; condo 4put together’, ‘ construct *; addo * put to ’, ‘ add *, etc. Cf. Munro on Luc. iv. 41.
Chap. 52.
etiam] ‘ for inflicting even trifling damage upon them ’.
cognoscit] ‘ he learns that scarcely one soldier in ten had escaped (was left) without a wound*.
appellat] ‘addresses*.
24 hoc] hoc is probably the acc. referring to quod detrimentum, ‘ he tells them that this loss which has been received...must be borne* etc. Schneider, however, says that hoc is the abl. correlating with the following quod ‘ must be borne with so much the more calmness as ’ etc. Long takes the same view.
Chap. 53.
27	per] ‘ by means of*.
29 cum] concessive use of cum; cf. 40. For another instance of the rapidity with which news travelled cf. vii. 3.
Ongma
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA^114	DE	BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. V.
gratulatio] congratulor and congratulatio are seldom if ever used in classical latin.
fieret] the subjunctive is to be explained by the consecutive use of the relative in quo clamore. It may be explained too, by the dimly perceptible notion of purpose which is implied in the sentence; the object of the shouting was to acquaint Labienus with the victory.
Page 45.
4 hibema] at St Pol.
8 consultabant] there are here 3 co-ordinate sentences, the first ending with consultabant, the second with explorabant', the third with habebant, and in accordance with the ordinary grammatical rule the last sentence is connected with the preceding by que. R. § 2202. In the present passage the second sentence from nuntios to explorabant consists of two parts, dimittebant and explorabant connected by et. This makes no difference to the observance of the above-mentioned rule.
to explorabant] ‘were trying to ascertain*.
intercessit] intercedere is used because the idea is that of an inter*al of time bringing an exception to the general anxiety of Caesar’s mind. Throughout this winter there was hardly any such interval of security.
quin...acciperet] ‘without his receiving*, ‘but he was always receiving *.
L. Roscio] stationed at Seez; cf. 24. The best mss insert quaestore after Roscio, two others legato; recent editors omit the word. There was only one quaestor in Gaul at this time, and that was M. Crassus. Cf. 2 5.
Aremoricae] these states (also called Armoricae) corresponded in extent, more or less, to the modem Bretagne and Normandie between the Loire and the Seme. The word is said to mean * dwellers on the sea- coast *, from the Keltic are {ad) ‘in*, and mori or muir {mare) our ‘mere’, ‘sea*, cf. vn. 75.
longius] longius, like amplius, is used without influencing the construction of the sentence.
fugae similis] fugae is possibly dative, probably genitive; the dative with similis is rare in Cicero in the comparison of living beings, but occurs frequently in comparison of things; in later writers it became more and more common. Madvig on Cic. Fin. v. 12. The old rule expressed in the line ille tui similis moribus, ore mihi has no foundation in fact.
Chap. 54.
alias...alias] ‘at one time...at another time*, cf. 57.
cum.. .denuntiaret] we should translate by a present participle * giving them to know *. denuntiare is to give an important solemn or threatening announcement.
23 Senones] the Senones inhabited the country between the Marne and the Seine. Their most important town was Agedincum (Sens).
firmd] cf. 20 Trinobantes prope firmissima earum regionum civitas.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAFor the expression Jirma et magnae auctoritatis cf. 35 viro forti et magnae auctoritatis.
adventu in Galliam Caesaris] Caesaris may almost be regarded as a genitive after the whole expression adventu in Galliam ‘ at the arrival into Gaul of Caesar *. Kr. qu. 2 commodissimum in Britanniam traiec- turn, and other instances.
obtinuerant] from this verb must be supplied obtinuerat with frater Moritasgus.
senatum] Caesar gives a strictly Roman title to this assembly of the
non fuerunt\ another instance of the emphatic position of the negative.
Page 46.
1 praecipuo honore habuit] Schneider qu. B.C. III. 47 magno in honore habuit where the preposition is added.
Gallici belli] this may be a genitive after officiis * services belonging to, connected with, the Gallic war’; or it may be an extension by an adjective of the expression belli, so common in the phrase belli militiaeque, which though regarded by the Romans as a genitive was really a locative: so below virtus belli is perhaps ‘ valour in war *.
mirandumne sit] the second member annon or necne of the indirect disjunctive interrogative is omitted.
tantum eius opinionis] ‘so much of that reputation’: as opinio virtutis might be used for ‘reputation for valour ’ (as in VII. 83), it is just possible, though scarcely probable, that eius is here the genitive after opinionis and refers to virtute.
gravissime] ‘took it grievously to heart*.
Chap. 65.
totius hiemis nullum tempus intermiserunt quin mitterent] cf. 53 neque ullum fere totius hiemis tempus intercessit quin acciperet.
cum...dicerent] ‘since they said they had twice made trial of it*, i.e. ‘since, as they said, they had ’ etc.
Ariovisti bello] in 58 B.C. Cf. 1. 30—54. non esse] non sese ?
hoc spe lapsus] cf. 48 opinione trium legionum delectus; 42 ab hac spe repulsus: opinione labi is quoted from Cic. Phil. XIII. 8.
tota Gallia] ‘ throughout Gaul *, so tota urbe ‘ throughout the city *.
Chap. 66,
23	Carnutes] cf. 25.
26 hoc] * hoc—armatum concilium to which refers quo—ad quod or ad cuiusmodi concilium * to all such assemblies *. For the fact cf. Liv. xxi. 20 in his nova terribilisque species visa est quod armati, ita mos gentis est, in concilium venerant (Kraner). So the Germans used to assemble in arms; cf. Tac. Germ, n ut turba placuit considunt armati, 13 nihil neque publicae neque privatae rei nisi artnati agunt.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGDE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. V.
convenit] convenire used of a single person is noticeable. Kr. qu. vi. 37, B. C. 11. 19: 1 joins the assembly’.
Cingetorigem generum suum] cf. 3. Caesar had not said before that Cingetorix was Indutiomarus* son-in-law.
Caesaris secutum fidem] cf. 20 Mandubratius Caesaris fidem secutus.
Page 47.
per fines Remorum] a glance at a map of Gaul will show that to reach the Senones and Carnutes the Treveri would have to traverse the land of the Remi; Lavacherie, where it is supposed that Labienus was encamped, was on the borders of the Treveri and Remi.
Chap. 57.
5	munitissimis]	the superlative of munitus is rare. For the whole
expression cf. in. 23 oppidum et natura lociet manu munitum, v. 21.
8	dimitteret]	* let slip for cogitare ut (ne) cf. vu. 59 ut incolumem exer
citum reduceret cogitabat, lit. 4 began to devise means in order that he might not let slip ’.
c6 timoris opinionem] 4 the belief in their (the Romans’) alarm ’. Labienus adopted the same plan that Cicero had found so successful
Chap. 68.
tanta diligentia...custodiis] ‘with so great diligence ...‘by keeping vigilant guard *: the first ablative expresses the manner or method, the second the means or instrument.
praecipit atque interdicit] praecipit expresses the order that they should all concentrate their attack on Indutiomarus, interdicit the prohibition that they were not to wound any one else till they saw him slain, cf. 22 interdicit atque imperat Cassivellauno. In translating, the two words had better be separated,praecipit ‘orders’ being taken with the first clause unum omnes; interdicit with the second neu quis quern. Cf. I Kings xxii.31 ‘But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of Israel *.
quodtnora] ‘because he was unwilling that he (Indutiomarus) should gain time by the delay afforded by the rest and so escape *. mora reliquorum means the delay caused by the Romans going in pursuit of the rest.
Page 48.
1 comprobat] ‘ fortune justifies his plan \ hominis almost = eius; or is there a slight opposition between fortuna and homo, human design justified by fate?
fluminis] the Ourthe, supposing Labienus to have been encamped at Lavacherie.
8 pauloque] the arrangement of words in this last clause should be noticed.