p. 1« i Balbe\ L. Cornelius Balbus, a native of Gades (Cadiz). He was Caesar’s praefectus fabrum in Spain and Gaul and was constantly employed by his chief in negotiations at Rome. In b. c. 40, towards the close of the year, he was appointed consul with P. Canidius Crassus, after the compulsory retirement of Cn. Domitius Calvinus and C. Asinius Pollio who had held office since the beginning of the year. Pliny, N. II. vii. 136, says that Balbus was the first foreigner to gain the high distinction of the Roman consulship. Further information respecting him may be found in Mr Reid’s preface to his edition of Cicero’s speech pro Z. Cornelio Balbo.
a difficultatis excusationem] ‘plea of difficulty’, cf. aetatis excusatio in 12 and B. C. I. 85: excusare difficultatem —4 to plead difficulty as an excuse
inertiae deprecationem] this seems to mean ‘a shrinking from the task through idleness’:	Hirtius feared that his constant refusal to
comply with Balbus’ request might seem due to indolence.
habere] ‘to involve’, ‘carry with it’.
Galliae] gen. after rerum gestarum, cf. Alexandriae below, and Cenabi caede vii. 28, unless Cenabi be a strict locative.
comparentes] ‘extant’; on the reading of this passage see appendix.
novissimumque imperfectum\ supply scriptum. Hirtius means the bellum civile in 3 books. In in. 106 Caesar begins to describe the events that gave rise to the Alexandrian war (b. c. 48, 47) and the treatise ends with the words haec initia belli Alexandrini fuerunt. That Caesar intended his work to end here is extremely improbable. It is generally supposed that Hirtius wrote the bellum Alexandrinum, but the bellum Africanum and Hispaniense are thought from a difference of style to come from a different hand. Yet in this dedicatory epistle Hirtius distinctly says that he carried on his history to the death of
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
Caesar; we must assume then either that a great part of his history has perished or that he is here speaking of work contemplated rather than of work performed, and that its completion was hindered by his death in
This dedication must have been written after Caesar’s death in
probably in the summer. Aulus Hirtius fell with his colleague Vibius Pansa in the battle of Mutina on April 27th, 43, that fatal day cum cxidit fato consul utcrquc pari as Ovid says. Hirtius was very intimate with Balbus, cf. Cic. Att. xiv. 20 (written in May 44) Hirtius vivit habitatque cum Balbo.
12 nihil tam operose] ‘that no work has been so elaborately finished by others as not to be surpassed by the elegance of these commentaries , or more freely, ‘no other work however elaborate can rival the elegance of these commentaries’, operosus is frequently used of careful literary composition, as by Horace Odes IV. 2. 31 operosa parvus carmina jingo. Ferd. Becher points out in Philol. xlii. 409 that tam operose almost = quamvis operose, since “opera is not the tertium comparationis but facultas atque elegantia scribendi”. The fact is the sentence is slightly illogical, but there is no need to attach any recondite meaning to tarn operose. Becher cf. Cic. Att. vm. 4 § 2 and other passages where there is a similar want of logical precision.
16 ut praerepta non praebitd\ observe the rhetorical conceit of praerepta...praebita and compare recusatio...excusationem in the first sentence. It is probably impossible to preserve the assonance in a literal translation ; perhaps one might venture on some such paraphrase as ‘seems to have prohibited rather than promoted the historical enquiries of others’. With this passage cf. Cic. Brut. 262 atque etiam connnentarios quosdam scripsit rerum suarum, valde quidetn inquam probandos, nudi enim sunt, recti et venusti, omni ornatu orationis tanquam veste detracta, sed dum voluit, alios habere parata unde sumerent qtti vellent scribere historiam, ineptis gratiam fortasse fecit, qui volent illa calamistris inurere -; sanos quidem homines a scribendo deterruit: nihil enim est in historia pura et illustri brevitate dulcius. These passages are interesting as showing the esteem in which the commentaries were already held.
celeriter] celeritas was conspicuous in all that Caesar did. It is
worthy of note that the adverb celeriter occurs about 80 times in the 7 books of the Gallic War.
p, 2. i verissima scientia'] ‘the most unerring skill in explaining his plans’: as Hirtius is here speaking of Caesar’s merits as a writer the word explicandorum must be used of lucid exposition ; Caesar does not use the word in the B. G., in B. C. 1. 78 it is found with consilium in a slightly different sense ibi se reliquum consilium explicaturos confidebant.
Alexandrino atque Africano bello] Caesar went to Alexandria in October 48, the Alexandrians surrendered in March 47. At the end of 47 Caesar left Italy for Africa where Pompey’s two sons Sextus and Gnaeus together with Metellus Scipio and others were carrying on the war. The battle of Thapsus was fought on April 6, 46, and on June
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIAPreface. Capp. i, 2.] NOTES.
13 Caesar started for Rome. Hirtius appears to have been in Achaia while Caesar was in Alexandria, Cic. ep. Att. XI. 14; he was with Caesar in Antioch in the summer of 47 ; in 46 before Caesar's return from Africa he was at Praeneste, Cic. Fam. ix. 6. See Nipperdey’s Quaestiones p. 8 foil.
tamen aliter] ‘yet it is with different feelings that we give ear to events which strike us by their novelty or strangeness and to those to which we are about to bear testimony ourselves’, admiratione, ‘by (exciting) wonder’, i.e. ‘by their strangeness’. For pro testimonio cf. Cic. Att. I. 16 § 2 neque dixi quidquam pro testimonio; Rose. Am. 101.
hoc ipsuni\ ‘I am rendering myself liable to this very charge of arrogance’.
Chai\ 1.
10 a superiore aestate\ ‘from the previous summer’, i.e. of 53 since which time there had been no long cessation of hostilities. Hirtius is now speaking of the winter rest of 52—51, in this book he describes the events of the years 51 and 50.
Caesar cum] notice the transposition of the name : the logical order would be cum Caesar, so in vii. 17 quin etia?n Caesar cum in opere singulas legiones appellaret...universi ab eo ne id Jaceret petebant.
resisti posse Romanis] ‘the Romans could be resisted’; the insertion
of a before Romanis spoils the sense. The Gauls knew that no multitude that they could gather together would suffice to resist the Romans (they had experienced this at Alesia), yet that if a number of tribes took up arms independently in different parts of Gaul (diversa) the Romans would not be strong enough to cope with them all at once. This is what Hirtius means though his language here and elsewhere is lacking in clearness and precision.
sortem incommodi] cf. 12 huius mali sors.
se vindicare in libertatem] lit. ‘claim themselves for freedom’, i.e. ‘assert their freedom’, cf. 39 and VIJ. 1 Galliam in libertatem vindicent: the phrase is of legal origin.
Chap. 2.
M. Antonium quaestorem] the duties of the military quaestor were chiefly financial; he was the paymaster of the troops and probably had some power of jurisdiction as well; special quarters, called qt/hestorium, were assigned to him in the camp. The importance of his position may be gathered from Cic. acc. in Verr. I. 40 itane vero? tu cum quaestor ad exercitum missus sis, custos non solum pecuniae, sed etiam consulis, particeps omnium rerum consiliorumque fueris, habitus sis in liberum loco sicut mos maiorum ferebat, repente relinquas, deseras, ad adversarios
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA32	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
transeas ? In B. G. I. 52 we read of a quaestor being put in command of a legion. The M. Antonius here mentioned is the celebrated Marc Antony.
suis hibernis]	at Bibracte situate on M. Beuvray, near Autun: cf. vn.
90 ipse Bibracte hiemare constituit. In I. 23 Caesar speaks of it as oppidum Aeduorum longe maximum et copiosissimum. The Bituriges were neighbours of the Aedui on the west.
legionem xm] the mss all have XII, but see n legio XIII quam cum T. Sextio in Biturigibus hi emar at, and a comparison of vii. 51 hanc rursus XIII legionis cohortes exceperunt quae ex castris minoribus eductae cum T. Sextio legato ceperant locum superiorem with vii. 91 where we read that Caesar sends T. Sextius with a single legion to the Bituriges makes it certain that xm is the right reading here. The legion may have been stationed at Avaricum (Bourges).
quae proxima fuerat] this must be the legion under the command of C. Antistius Reginus stationed among the Ambivareti who were clientes of the Aedui in whose immediate neighbourhood they dwelt. The rest of the legions were thus distributed; T. Labienus with two among the Sequani probably at Vesontio (Besangon), C. Fabius and L. M. Basilus with two among the Remi at Durocortorum (Rheims), C. Rebilus with one among the Ruteni, perhaps at Rodez, Q. Cicero and P. Sulpicius at Cabillonum (Ch&lons sur Saone) and Matisco (Macon) with two. The following table may be useful for reference:
Thus there were at this time 11 legions in Gaul representing a force of perhaps about 35000 men (foot-soldiers) besides a few thousand cavalry. All the particulars of the above table must not be regarded as certain; see Nipperdey, Quaestiones 117 foil; Napoleon, Histoire 11. 315 ; Goler, Casar’s Gallischer Krieg ed. 2, 333.
fuerat\ ‘had been* next to it, i.e. before the xmth was removed.
relictis\at the head quarters of the xmth legion, probably Avaricum.
complura] this form is more correct than compluria which was chiefly used by the early writers. The spelling of the word "was discussed by the Romans themselves, cf. A. Gellius v. 21.
potuerint] subj. becausequiis causal; ‘inasmuch as it has not proved possible to keep them in check’.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFOChap. 3.
32	imparatis disiectisque]	probably ablative absolute.
p. 3* i quod...consuevit] I cannot accept Kraner’s view that quod is a conjunction and that incursio has to be supplied as the subject of consuevit; this is to do violence to the natural sequence and construction of the words. The sentence is no doubt illogical if quod be taken as the relative, but not so much so as to obscure the sense : ‘for even that customary sign of a hostile raid which is wont to be understood by the burning of homesteads was omitted’, or as we might say in more idiomatic English ‘ that sign of a hostile raid which burning homesteads furnish was omitted.’ Why did not Kraner suggest the alteration of quod to quae? quae might easily have been corrupted to quod after signum.
aedificiorum] aedificia are mostly the granaries in which the com was stored up, so that the burning of them would be prejudicial to the Romans as well as to the natives.
interdicto] ‘by Caesar’s prohibition’; we should say ‘by Caesar’s order’. Cf. v. 58praecipit atque interdicit.
si...vellet] ‘in case of his wishing’.
copia...deficeretur] copia is ablative and Caesar is the subject of deficeretur. Caesar would probably have written copia (nominative) deficeret, cf. VI. 16 sed cum eius generis copia deficit: the passive deficior does not appear to occur in the B. G.; in B. C. ill. 64 Caesar writes cum aquilifer a viribus deficeretur; cf. Ovid Her. V. 148 deficior prudens artis ab arte mea.
frustra] used elliptically again in 5 nec frustra ; so too nequiquam
: cf. Hor. Od. III. 7. 21 frustra, nam scopulis surdior Icari \ voces audit adhuc integer. Caesar would hardly have used the word so.
nec dat] Caesar forces each tribe to look to its own safety without troubling itself about the welfare of its neighbours.
fideles amicos retinebat] ‘kept his friends loyal’, dubitantes ‘the waverers’, cf. VII. 4, 63.
Chap. 4.
*
19 brumalibus diebus] ‘short winter days’: bruma is no doubt for brevima superlative of brevis.
frigoribus] the plural is used because the idea of periods of cold, cold seasons, is prominent; so in v. 12 loca sunt temperatiora quam in Gallia, remissioribus frigoribus.
21 tot milia nummum] ‘as many thousand sesterces’ i.e. the centurionshad as many thousands as the common soldiers had hundreds, viz. two. The amount given to the centurion was usually twice that given to the
P. C. VIII.
Digitized by GOOglC34	DE	BELLO	GALLICO.	[Comm.	VIII.
common soldier: 200 sesterces would be £\. 13.4, and 2000 £16. 13. 4. For various proposed alterations of the text see appendix.
praedae nomine condonata] ‘granted under the name of booty’: it was called booty but was really a grant from the military exchequer.
die xxxx] Caesar started on Dec. 31, hence he returned about Feb. 8.
Camutes] neighbours of the Bituriges on the north. Cenabum, afterwards called civitas Aurelianorum and now Orleans, was their chief settlement.
decem et octo\ this would make the date of his second departure from Bibracte about Feb. 26. Observe that amplius does not affect the construction of the words with which it is placed, cf. vn. 15 amplius xx urbes where urbes is nominative, so infra 10.
legiones xml et vi] under the command of Q. Cicero (the orator’s brother) and P. Sulpicius. They were stationed at Chalons and Macon, cf. vii. 91.
explicandae rei frumentariae] ‘facilitating the corn supply’. The provisions for the army were carried up the Rhone and Saone.
Chap. 5.
ducti] ‘induced*: perhaps Hirtius wrote docti.
vicis oppidisque] ‘villages and strongholds’: the Gallic oppidum was a large entrenchment for which a naturally strong site was usually selected.
p. 4i 1. nuper devicti] during the previous year, cf. vii. 11.
dimiserant] ‘had given up’; cf. v. 18 ripas dimitterent and elsewhere.
quae contectis...inaedificata] ‘which had been constructed there, after straw had been hastily collected for the purpose of roofing over the huts ’: the words tentoriorum integendorum gratia are awkward and unsuitable and should perhaps be expunged. The tecta are subdivided into partim Gallorum and partim quae etc.; Caesar quartered his men in huts some of which were ready to hand, having been deserted by the Gauls, and others had to be hastily constructed by the Romans themselves.
• The compound inaedificata means * built in the place ’, ‘ on the spot *.
milites compegit] ‘thrust his men*. For the text of this passage see appendix.
hiemis difficultate terrore periculi] a good instance of the grammatical figure called‘chiasmus’.
diutius] ‘for any length of time*.
tempestatibus durissimis] ablative of attendant circumstances.
dispersi dissipantur] cf. v. 58 dispersi ac dissipati discedunt.
Digitized by Googleinitium belli nasceretur] so B. C. III. 20, and see my note on v. 26.
quantum in ratione esset] 4 so far as a prudent calculation could determine’.
exploratum haberet] lit. ‘had it clearly ascertained*, cf. II. 4 etc.
sub tempus aestivorum] ‘just at the time of the summer encampment as Kraner says, tempus aestivo?-um is only a military circumlocution for aestatem, sub with acc. of time may mean ‘just before’, ‘just after* or ‘about’, cf. Palmer on Hor. Sat. I. 1. 10 with his addenda.
nullum summum bellum] ‘ no war of supreme importance*.
habebat] the subject of course is Caesar. The two legions are the vith and xivth which Caesar had summoned from the Sa6ne.
Bellovacos] the Bellovaci gave their name to Beauvais. Caesar says of them in 11. 4 plurimum inter eos {Belgas) Bellovacos et virtute et auctoritate et hominum numero valere ; hos posse conficei‘e armata milia centum, pollicitos ex eo numero electa sexaginta.
finitimas civitates] some of these are mentioned by name in the next chapter,
Atrebate] the Atrebates occupied the neighbourhood of Arras the’ ancient Nemetocenna.
Suessionum] this tribe has left its name in Soissons the ancient Noviodunum : how this powerful tribe (for a short account of which see ii. 4) came to be stipendiaries (<attributi) of the Remi is not clear.
facerent impressionem] ‘make an inroad*, cf. Varro R. R. II. 4, hostes arbitrati occasionem se habere victoriae impressionem facere coeperunt; Liv. iv. 28 secuti dant impressionem.
legionem xi] the Xith legion had been withdrawn from its winter quarters among the Ambivareti to take part in Caesar’s invasion of the Bituriges, and after a 40 days* campaign sent back to its old headquarters.
legiones duas] the vmth and ixth stationed among the Remi probably at Durocortorum (Rheims).
alteramque] the viith as we learn from 8. Labienus had the viith and xvth under his command. Caesar thus had 4 legions for this campaign, the viith, vinth, ixth and xith.
opportunitas] ‘suitableness* i.e. in respect of distance from the scene of war.
perpetuo suo labore] 4 with no cessation of toil for himself*. Caesar made his legions take turns in bearing the burdens of warfare though he allowed himself no rest.
3—2
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIF<DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
Chap. 7.
p, 5. 6 atque hos, «0» ‘and they too were not persons who’.
8 remissi\ ‘sent back’ into the deserted oppida by the main body of the inhabitants who had migrated.
12 Ambianos] the Ambiani dwelt in the neighbourhood of Amiens which is named from them. The Aulerci Eburovices (so-called to distinguish them from another branch of the Aulerci) occupied the country south of the Seine near Evreux which is a corruption of the name Eburovices. The Caleti have perhaps left a trace of their name in the town of St Vallery en Caux in the department of Seine inferieure. The Veliocasses on the north bank of the Seine have left their name in the district of Vexin. Their chief oppidum was Rotomagus (Rouen). The memory of the Atrebates lingers in Arras.
locum] the various hints giyen by Hirtius as to the natural features of this locality should make its identification comparatively easy. It is usually placed on the south bank of the Aisne about 3 miles to the eastwards of its junction with the Oise. A little stream, the Ru de Berne, here flows into the Aisne. The converging course of this streamlet and the river forms a neck of land from 2 to 3 kilometres across. The ground is of sufficient elevation to be called a hill and bears the name of M. St Marc : between M. St Marc and the river is a narrow tract of level ground along which runs the road from Compi&gne to Soissons; on the south side of the Ru de Berne, and separated by it from M. St Marc, is M. St Pierre. Beyond these to the eastward, the Ru de Berne takes its rise in some low marshy ground in which are several small lakes, one of them perhaps 500 yards in length; the whole course of the Ru de Berne is fringed by marshes. On M. St Marc in the neck of land between the Aisne and the Ru de Berne it is generally supposed that the Bellovaci were encamped, while the Romans occupied M. St Pierre about one kilometre to the south. Almost between the two hills and bisected by the streamlet lies the village of Vieux-Moulin. To the south and west extends the vast Foret de Compi&gne. On St Pierre is a ruined church, and there are distinct traces of a Roman encampment of which the tourist will find mention in Baedeker’s Paris p. 322. A summary of the different views held on the subject of this campaign will be found in Desjardins II. 718 note. M. Desjardins himself despairs of a definite solution.
quorum et vicinitas...infinita\ an artificially constructed and inelegant expression, to which one would scarcely find anything similar in Caesar.
ex insidiis] lit. ‘from ambuscades’ i.e. ‘by setting ambuscades’.
Chap. 8.
quae proponerentur\ proponebantur might have been written, in which case the relative clause would have been quite independent; thesubjunctive makes the statement less direct, ‘which were said to be proposed
temeritate] Caesar often speaks of the temeritas of the Gauls, cf. vii. 42 temeritas quae maxime illi hominum generi est innata.
omnibus rebus] adverbial, ‘in every way
inserviendum quo hostis prodiretJ 4 should use their efforts to induce the foe to come out *.
suorum] ‘his men’ i.e. the Romans.
p, 6. 2 octavo iam stipendio] the xith legion was levied by Caesar in Italy in 58, the other three were taken from their winter-quarters at Aquileia the same year, cf. B. G. I. 10.
in conlatione reliquarum] ‘in comparison with the rest*.
vetustatis] vetustas here almost=1 experience ’; opinionem * reputation*.
consilio] equivalent in sense to concilium, cf. ill. 3 consilio celeriter convocato and my note in appendix to Book vi.
rebus iis quae essent] ‘such matters as had been reported to him’: rather more indefinite than erant\
si posset] ‘to see if he could’; cf. vii. 89 reservatis Aeduis atque Arvernis si per eos civitates recuperare posset.
notice	that	legiones	followed	by	the	singulars septima, octava
would have been equally correct.
in expeditionibus] i.e. when the men marched expediti: the word expeditio only occurs once in the rest of the commentaries viz. B. G. v. 10.
cogeret] ‘close*, equivalent to clauderet agmen.
accidere]	4 should be presented to *: it would have been more natural
to write species ostendi hostibus posset.
paene quadrato agmine] it was not quite a quadratum agmen as it would have been if a legion had marched on each side of the baggage as well as one in front and one behind.
celerius opinione eorum] cf. II. 3 celerius omni opinione.
Chap. 9.
15 acie] line of battle, always opposed to agmen line of march.
admiratus] * filled with astonishment at *.
valle...patente] ‘on the other side of a valley which was deeply sunk rather than of w’ide extent* or ‘which formed a deep depression out of proportion to its width*.
loriculam] a breastwork or parapet made of fascines [crates), cf. v. 40, vii. 72.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFO38	DE	BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
pro hac ratione \eius altitudinis] eius is gen. after altitudinis and = valli: the words pro hac ratione seem to mean ‘ proportioned to this calculation * of its height, the loricula was to be of a size suitable to a rampart of 12 feet. I see no reason to adopt Madvig’s pro portione. The loricula was built on (inaedificare) the vallum.
fossam dupliceni] a line of two parallel ditches each 15 feet wide: these were dug on the slope of the hill just below the vallum, so that an attacking force trying to carry the position by assault would have to cross first one trench, then another a little higher up the slope, and finally the vallum or rampart surmounted by its loricula. Traces of all these works are said to exist still on M. St Pierre, and diagrams of them are given in Napoleon’s Atlas.
lateribus deprimi directis] ‘to be sunk with perpendicular sides’; that is, the trenches were to be the same width at the bottom as at the top. This must be the meaning of the words (cf. VII. 72 fossam pedum XX directis lateribus duxit), though Napoleon says that the existing remains do not bear out the statement.
excitari] excitare is frequently used of building; see note on in. 14.
pontibus.. .coniungl] pontes are gangways of planks thrown across
(traiectae) from tower to tower and laid evenly together (constratae). The towers were erected at intervals on the vallum or rampart; hence men standing on the rampart would have the pontes over their heads and so be to a certain extent protected from falling missiles. There would possibly be three pontes one above another connecting the three tabulata (stories) of the towers, and from Hirtius’ remark that the Roman bowmen were protected by their elevation I gather that they were stationed on the topmost pons.	'
frontes] the outward sides facing the enemy: they were fringed with parapets of twisted osier-work.
32 portis\ the gates of the camp, i.e. openings in the surrounding ramparts. These openings were, for better security, fitted with doors {fores) and higher towers built on each side of them.
Chap. 10.
P« 7. 5 palude] the marsh skirting the Ru de Berne.
eadem\ ‘by the same way’.
summovebant] ‘removed’ ‘thrust back’: this word was commonly used of the Roman lictors who cleared a way for the consuls.
id quod accidere erat necesse] in 3 Hirtius wrote quod accidere fuit necesse.
disiectis]	‘scattered’ almost equivalent to raris; cf. pabulatione quae
propter anni tempus cum exigua tum disiecta esset.
stultas cogitationes incitabat] ‘stimulated the foolish fancies of the barbarians’.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA





































40	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
equitibus interpositi] the Germans habitually practised this method of fighting; see the description of it in 1. 48, and mention of a similar custom among the Gauls in vn. 18; cf. infra 36.
paucis resistentibus interfectis] ‘after killing the few who resisted them ’.
comminus opprimebantur] ‘were overwhelmed in hand-to-hand conflict’.
subsidiary ‘stand in reserve’: the word is said not to occur elsewhere’.
5	amissis] in consequence of their panic they ‘ lost ’ their positions of the
higher ground.
quam se aut] notice the misplacement of aut; the se belongs only to reciperent and should logically have come after aut. Kraner cf. Vi. 25 qui seaui adisse dicat...aut...acceperit.
26	nonnulli]	‘in some cases’: the word is in apposition to Germani the
subject of profugerent.
adverso mediocri casu] adverso and mediocri are not coordinate epithets of casu, but adverso casu is regarded as almost a single word = ‘mischance’, ‘reverse’, and mediocri qualifies them, ‘a«light reverse’: cf. note on equestri proelio levi in vil. 36.
Chap. 14.
32	similem obsessionem Alesiae] Alesiae is-probably genitive, *a blockade
like ‘to Alesia* i.e. ‘a blockade like the blockade of Alesia’. This abbreviated form of comparison is not uncommon and is noticed in my note on vi. 22. For the construction of similis see my note on v. 53.
P« 9«	2 explicant] ‘marshal’, ‘set in order’, lit. ‘disentangle’.
carrorum] the carrus was a two-wheeled vehicle.
agmen impedimentorum] ‘ baggage-train ’.
at Caesar] ‘but Caesar decided that on the one hand he ought not to attack the enemy while standing their ground, on the other, that it would be well to bring up his legions so near as to prevent the barbarians from quitting their position without risk, in the face of the Roman troops’. The sentence is rendered somewhat obscure by the double neque...neque non; it might have been expressed in simpler language thus:—et resistentes non aggrediundos...et {tamen) usque eo legiones etc. The parallelism of the two neque's may be preserved as in the translation above by the words ‘on the one hand’ and ‘on the other hand’.
resistentes] this refers to the Gallic troops mentioned in the previous sentence as having been drawn up in front of the camp.
10 impedita] ‘embarrassing’.
3itized by GOOglCCapp. 13—15]
id iuguni\ M. Collet which, as Hirtius says, extends alongside the marsh and almost joins M. St. Marc on which the Bellovaci were encamped, only a small ravine (mediocri valle) separating the two.
pontibus\ ‘gangways’, raised paths or dams.
in summam planitiem iugi\ Caesar appears to have crossed the marsh of the Ru de Berne just below the Etang de la Rouillie and then to have ascended the gentle slopes of M. Collet, keeping along its level plateau (planitiem iugi) till he approached the mediocris vallis mentioned above which separates M. Collet from the higher elevation of M. St. Marc.
ultimum iugum\ the edge or limit of the ridge.
eo loco unde]4 in such a position that from it tormento] a machine for throwing missiles.
Chap. 15.
1
barbari] ‘the barbarians confident in the nature of the ground, not refusing to fight in case the Romans should attempt to ascend the hill (M. St. Marc) nor able to send their forces away by degrees in small detachments, for fear they should be thrown into confusion when dispersed, remained still in their position’.
cum non recusarent...nonpossent] the subjunctive with cum (‘while they did not refuse’ etc.) may be best represented in English by present participles ‘not refusing’, ‘not being able’ as below cum viderent... neque possent ‘seeing’, ‘not being able’.
pertinacia] ‘obstinacy’ cf. my note on I. 42.
castris eo loco metatis] metari castra is to measure out the ground for a camp, to pitch a camp, eo loco on the extremity of the ridge of M Collet or “on the heights that lie immediately to the right of the Ru du Berne” (Kampen). Notice the unpleasant repetition of castra after castris, which might easily have been avoided.
metatis] the active form meto (presupposed here) is rarely found being only quoted from Vergil Culex 172. The deponent nutari is frequent but occurs only once in Caesar, in B. C. in. 13.
cum viderent] see note above on cum non recusarent.
sui recipiendi] this use of the genitive of the possessive suus where the accusative plural se would be more natural is frequent in Caesar; see my note on v. 38; cf. 16 facultatem sui recipiendi.
fasces stramentorum] ‘bundles of straw’. On the text of this passage see appendix.
per manus inter se traditos] ‘ handed on from one to another ’ cf. vii. 25 note.
uno tempore] the near repetition of tempore is a mark of hasty writing.
continens flammd\ ‘a continuous wall of flame’.
Digitized by GOO^lCDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VIII.
Chap. 16.
p. 10. 6 turmas] ‘troops of cavalry’. To each legion was attached a body of 300 cavalry divided into 10 turmae ; each turma had a vexillum of its own and was commanded by three officers called decuriones and three of lower grade called optiones. Kraner remarks that Caesar does not use the word turma to denote a body of cavalry without some explanatory word such as equitum.
intrare] on the text of this passage see appendix.
timerent'] timere with infinitive is less common than vereri with infinitive; cf. B.C. 1. 64, hi. 73; Drager Hist. Synt. 11. 328.
ro	vix.. .equorum] we should say ‘could scarcely see their horses’ heads’.
animadverterent] this word seems scarcely suitable here ; one would have expected viderent or videre possent; but animadverto (or animum adverto) is a favourite word with Hirtius; I learn from Holder’s index that in his 55 chapters it occurs 10 times as against 8 times in the 90 chapters of Caesar’s Bk vil. and 24 times in Caesar’s seven books altogether.
loco munitissimo] no doubt on M Ganelon northward of Compi^gne from which it is separated by the Aisne, though the distance given, viz. 10 miles, is an exaggeration unless we suppose that they fled to the further end of the hill.
inde] * thence ’: they made this retreat their base of operations and sent out ambuscade parties from it.
detrimenta] detrimentum is another favourite word with Hirtius who uses it 9 times as against 9 times in the whole of Caesar’s seven books.
Chap. 17.
eo loco] the locality is more exactly described in the next chapter, campum ad rem gerendam, etc.
quos coftlocarel] ‘with the intention of placing them’ = ut eos con- locaret.
missuros] used here absolutely without an object expressed.
suspicaretur] subjunctive, because the clause is suboblique—‘whither,
as Caesar was informed, he suspected that the Romans would send’ etc.
qua consuetudine...consuerat] ‘according to his usual custom of sending them to protect the foragers’.
Chap. 18.
27 campum] this is supposed by Napoleon and others to be the narrow plain of Choisy au Bac lying between a bend of the Aisne on the north and the Compiegne forest on the south, and about two or three miles from M St Marc.
riginal from "Y OF CALIFOCapp. 16—20.]
ig indagine] this word exhibits an instance of endo or indu (cf. Greek tvfiov) the old form of the preposition in, preserved in some compound words such as endoperator— imperator (used by Lucretius) and indaudire (Plautus).
animo atque armis parati] ‘ready no less in spirit than equipment*.
subsequentibus legionibus] ‘as the legions were close behind*. The cavalry (nostri) were quite ready to fight knowing that they were supported by the infantry.
3a turmatim] ‘by troops ’. Apparently the Romans had descended on the other (northern) side of M Collet and had marched along the strip of level ground between the Aisne and M St Marc, and so, crossing the Ru de Berne near its junction with the Aisne, entered the plain of Choisy au Bac. The enemy were concealed in the woods skirting the plain.
P# 11.	4	quod plerumque...accipitur] an awkwardly worded sentence :
‘and generally when this (i.e. the overcrowding in a small space) happens in cavalry engagements through some panic, then the very multitude of the combatants causes some loss*.
Chap. 19.
rart] ‘here and there*, invicem * each in his turn*. Apparently the officers took care that the same men and horses should not be exposed for too long a time.
proeliarentur] proelium and proeliari oecur 8 times in this one chapter.
diversum] ‘scattered*.
iniretur] inire scarcely seems a suitable word to denote the duration of an engagement.
14	docui] supra 17.
nostri] the cavalry with the light-armed footsoldiers who were fighting with them.
hostes concidunt animis] ‘the spirits of the enemy fall*.
nequiquam] cf. Hirtius’ use of frustra in 3 and 5.
30	txcedere] infinitive after adduci, cf. the infinitive after admoneri in 12.
nulla calamitate victus potuit] — non ulla calamitate victus potuit, as in translation the negative has to be taken closely with potuit.
Chap. 20.
p.12. i vestigiis ingressus] Cicero Rep. VI. 26 has vestigiis patris ingredi while Livy xxxvn. 53 has vestigia in a similar connection.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII
milibus] the ablative is governed by longius and the words plus minus ‘more or less’ are used parenthetically and independently, as in a fragment of Ennius septingenti sunt paulo plus aut minus anni: see appendix.
atque his] ‘and they too’.
silvarum beneficio] ‘thanks to the woods’, cf. I. 53 sortium beneficio se esse incolumem.
cantu tubarum] ‘at the sound of trumpet’.
legati...mittantur] ‘ let us send envoys and hostages to Caesar ’.
Chap. 21
omnibus] dative: ‘this design having approved itself to all*.
mutuatus erat] mutuari in its literal sense of borrowing is generally used with reference to money; see the Lexx., so mutuum means a loan of money.
e vestigio] ‘forthwith*.
18 nunquam profecto esset inlaturus] ‘he would surely never feel disposed to inflict at all ’. The barbarians say that they had been utterly ruined in the contest; had it been in Caesar’s power to inflict this ruin on them without a battle and while their power was unimpaired (integris), he would have been far too generous to do it; let him then be content with the disasters they had suffered in war and not add to their sufferings.
ut in tanta calamitate] ‘considering the vastness of the calamity’ i.e. as far as there could be any commodum in such a calamity.
senatum] a Roman term adopted by Hirtius to express the council of Gallic elders, as by Caesar in vn. 32 and elsewhere. Correus had put himself at the head of a popular rising; cf. I. 17 esse nonnullos quorum auctoritas apud plebem plurimum valeat, qui privatim plus possint quam ipsi magistratus, said of the Aeduan Dumnorix.
quantum imperitam plebem] the nominative imperita plebs might have been used, but the nominative in the subordinate relative clause is attracted into the accusative and infinitive construction.
Chap. 22.
sanitatem] cf. 1. 42 ad sanitatem reverti, VII. 42, bell. Alex. 24, and animos sanat in 38 of this book.
scire atque intellegere] ‘he knows right well’, Doberenz and Dinter, who remark that in such pairs of verbs the second characterises the first, cf. vi. 9 petunt atque orant ‘they beg with earnest entreaties’.
causam] used like alrla ‘the blame*.
delegari] this word is not used by Caesar nor by Cicero (with one doubtful exception).
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIAneminem vero] Caesar rejects their excuse that Correus had thrown off the authority of the senate and encouraged the people to excesses.
bonis] another term drawn from the political life of Rome : * the
well-intentioned party’, ‘the friends of order’.
Chap. 23.
p. 13. 3 Bellovacorum speculabantur evenlum] ‘ were waiting to see the ultimate fate of the Bellovaci’: cf. navium eventum in IV. 31.
ius dicente]^conventus agente which phrase is generally used by Caesar himself, cf. vii. 1 note.
infidelitatem] the word is rare; it occurs in B. C. II. 33.
sine ulla perfidia] we can scarcely believe that Caesar himself would have approved of such a villainous act as this of Labienus, though the Roman standard of honour was never very high. That Labienus had little sense of honour is shewn by his subsequent treachery to Caesar.
11 Volusenum] mentioned by Caesar in ill. 5 as tribunus militum, vir et consilii magni et virtutis.
ad eam rem] to be taken closely with delectos ‘chosen for this purpose
manum arripuisset] grasping the hand was with the ancients a pledge of good faith, cf. Cic. Phil. XI. 5 dexterae quae fidei testes esse solebant; pairs of clasped hands were sometimes wrought in precious metal and sent as a token of friendship, cf. Tac. H. I. 54.
vel insueta re permotus vef] one would like to feel that the first reason is the true one and that the centurion was prevented at the last moment by compunction and not by force from achieving this foul murder.
Chap. 24.
■ quo sibi resisteret] ‘for the purpose of resisting him*. The addition of this weak clause is hardly in Caesar’s manner.
M. Antonium] Antonius had been stationed at Bibracte with Caesar; cf. note on the distribution of forces in 2.
C. Fabium] Fabius had commanded two legions among the Remi.
audiebat] ‘he was told*: the imperfect is usual, cf. 11. 12, IV. 7 etc.
C. Caninium Rebilum] this officer, had been ordered to the Ruteni, probably to Rodez, in command of the first legion, cf. vii. 90 and note on 2, but he is now said to have had two with him. Riistow, Napoleon and Goler believe the other legion to have been the xth which had previously been quartered at Bibracte. From 26, 27 one may perhaps
Digitized by Google46	DE	BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
infer that Rebilus had never reached the Ruteni, but was somewhere in the territory of the Pictones; Napoleon quotes a statement of Orosius to the effect that Rebilus was detained on his way by an opposing force.
p. 14* i firmas"] * strong ’.
T. Labienutri\ the legions with Labienus at Vesontio were probably the vilth and the xvth.
togatam Galliam] Gallia Cisalpina, called togata because in it the Roman toga was worn, whereas Gaul beyond the Alps was often known as Gallia comata from the long hair worn by the natives.
colonias civium • Romanorum] the Transpadane communities here mentioned were not exclusively colonies of Roman burgesses of which there were only four in Cisalpine Gaul, but ‘Latin Colonies’ established by Cn. Pompeius Strabo (father of Cn. Pompeius Magnus) in 89. There was a large Keltic element among the inhabitants of the Transpadane district, and when Strabo organised them into settled communities it was thought advisable instead of conferring the full Roman franchise on them at once, to give them temporarily the so-called Latin rights, ius Latii, which, while bestowing on them many privileges, excluded them from voting in elections at Rome and from serving in the legions; but it seems certain that Caesar levied soldiers from them, in which case he must have regarded them as Roman burgesses: ‘it is possible’, says Mommsen, ‘that Caesar combined with the levy the bestowal of the franchise; but more probably he adhered to the standpoint of his party, which instead of seeking to procure for the Transpadanes the Roman franchise rather regarded it as already legally belonging to them’.
decursione] ‘descent * a suitable word, as Kraner points out, to apply to barbarian hordes pouring down from the Alps.
Tergestinis] the inhabitants of Tergeste, Trieste.
7 fines Ambiorigis] Ambiorix was last mentioned in VI. 43 as a fugitive vainly pursued by Caesar. He originally shared with Catu- volcus the kingdom of the Eburones v. 24.
proximum]	‘in the next degree’ adverbial; dignitatis to be taken
with esse, according to the well-known idiom; ‘it became his dignity’, ‘it was incumbent on his dignity’. Hirtius means that the most desirable event was the capture and humiliation of Ambiorix himself; failing that, ‘honour required* that his lands should be ravaged.
vastare civibus] this construction of vastare with ablative of that which is removed is quoted by L. and S. only from Vergil Aen. VIII. 8 et latos vastant cultoribus agros and Statius Theb. ill. 576 agrosque viris annosaque vastant oppida. The ablatives with vastare in the next chapter are obviously of a different kind.
reliquos fecisset] ‘should be found to have left’: fecisset Jess direct and precise than fecerat.
Original from NIVERSITY OF CALIFORNCapp. 24—27.]	NOTES.	47
Chap. 25.
propter Germaniae vicinitatem] so in I. 1 Caesar says that the Helvetii are preeminent in valour quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum Germanis contendunt.
non multum a Germanis differebat] they affected a Germanic origin, cf. Tac. Germ. 28 quoted in my note on 11. 24.
imperata faciebat] imperata facere is a constant phrase in Caesar for the submission of an inferior to a superior power.
Chap. 26.
Pictonum] their name survives in Poitou and Poitiers. Lemonum
mentioned below is the ancient name of the Gallic oppidum afterwards called Pictones (Poitiers). It is well known that most of these more important Gallic settlements, when they fell under the Roman occupation, lost their original names and were called after the tribe to whom they had belonged, e.g. Samarobriva, an oppidum of the Ambiani, was subsequently called Ambiani, whence its present name Amiens; so Paris, originally Lutetia, was named after the Parisii.
litteris nuntiisque\ the same collocation in I. 26 Caesar litteras nuntiosque misit and elsewhere, so fama and nuntii are often combined.
cum] ‘although’.
multis hominum milibus] ablative of the instrument or means; Dumnaco ablative of the agent: ‘was blockaded by Dumnacus with several thousand men.’
Andiuni] the Andes occupied the country now called Anjou. They were separated by the Loire from the Pictones.
infirmas] the weakness of these two legions is mentioned in 24.
p. 15.	1. rursus.. .redit] the pleonasm is noticeable, so Caesar writes
rursus reverterunt, IV. 4.
Chap. 27.
C. Fabius\ who had been sent by Caesar to the west of Gaul.
obsidibus firmat] ‘confirms their allegiance by exacting hostages’: a different use in 48 Commius se ea facturum quae imperavit obsidibus firmat.
litterisque.. .certior] Doberenz-Dinter remark on the curious way in which this clause is closely connected by que with the two preceding clauses in fidem recipit and obsidibus firmat though it is in no sense homogeneous with them.
7 externum hostem] ‘an enemy from the outside’ i.e. the Romans, as opposed to the besieged townspeople.48	DE	BELLO	GALLLCO.	[Comm. VIII.
respicere] ‘pay regard to’: respicere ac ti?nere occurs B. C. I. 5,
(qu. by Doberenz).
11 transeundum] at Saumur according to Napoleon. 4 At Saumur or at Angers’, Goler.
potissimum credidit] ‘thought it the most probable course.’
quem petebant] notice the indicative : 4 which, as an actual fact, they were making for.’
equitatum procedere imperat] in the best authors impero is constructed either with the accusative and infinitive passive as in v. 7 retrahi eum imperat (or deponent as in vil. 60 cohortes proficisci imperat) or with ut and subjunctive. The accusative and infinitive active after imperare is found chiefly in poetry and the later prose writers. See Madvig Gram. § 396.
quantum cum processisset] ‘as that when they had advanced thus far’: the whole sentence is cumbrously expressed; Hirtius means that orders were given to the cavalry to precede the main body of the infantry only at such a distance that, if occasion arose, they could return to the intrenchments occupied by the legions without wearying their horses.
magna praeda] ablative after poliuntur, while multis interfectis is an ablative absolute.
Chap. 28.
sic paratos ut] sometimes animo is inserted as in vii. 19 quos cum sic animo paratos videat ut,
gereretur] hortatur is an historic present and therefore the imperfect is allowable in the dependent clause.
succedentibus sibi peditibus] an ablative absolute;	‘	the	enemy’s
cavalry fight boldly, as their infantry were coming up to their support.’ In the next sentence qui refers to the pedites, and the sentence is explanatory of the succedentibus, ‘ who halting throughout their whole line aid their horsemen against ours ’: the whole army of the Gauls, it will be remembered, were retreating before the Romans who were harassing their rear with cavalry; the Gallic horse at last made a stand, and then, when the cavalry engagement became general, the main body of the retreating Gauls halted and came to the support of their horse.
32 contemptis pridie superatis hostibus] ‘despising the enemy whom they had conquered the day before’.
cum meminissent] ‘remembering*.
p. 16. ut pridie cognoverant] ‘according to their experience of the day before *. On the previous day no reinforcements had been sent to the aid of the cavalry.
3 nancti videbantur] ‘ thought that they had gained ’.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIAinvicem] * in turn *: detachments of infantry were sent one after the other to the support of the cavalry.
turmae] cavalry, acies infantry.
discursu\ this word is not used by Caesar who has the verb discurro once.
13 quantum...interficiunt] this sentence cannot be translated literally: ‘ commence a slaughter which lasted as long as their hands had strength to kill or their horses to pursue*, tantum is a neuter accusative denoting the extent of the action of interficere\ cf* Roby § 1095.
amplius] cf. note on 4.
Chap. 30.
Senonem] one of the Senones who occupied the district around Sens.
conlectis] the double chiasmus in this sentence should be noticed. conlectis hominibus)(servis vocatis and exulibus ascitis)(receptis latronibus.
*
petere] the infinitive depends on constaret. The whole of this chapter consists of one long ill-expressed sentence.
Lucterium Cadurcum] for the account of Lucterius cf. vii. 5—7. Cadurcus one of the Cadurci, who gave their name to Cahors.
provinciam] the province of Gallia Braccata or Narbonensis constituted at the beginning of the first century B.c. See my note on I. 1.
cum legionibus duabus] probably the 1st and xth, see note on 24.
ne detrimento...caperetur] ‘lest through injury or panic in (of) the province great disgrace should be incurred in consequence of the depredations of lawless men ’.
Chap. 31.
p. 17.. 1. spatio ac tempore] the two words bearing almost the same meaning are used for the sake of emphasis: ‘if a sufficient space of time were granted them ’. Sometimes spatium by itself denotes time as in 3 nec dat ulli civitati spatium.
consequitur] * attends ‘ falls to the lot of*.
saepe vexati] the participle is concessive ‘though frequently harassed ’.
nunquam...mentionem] the commentators point out that Hirtius has forgotten the overtures made by the Carnutes in B.c. 53, cf. vi. 4.
Armoricae] these states occupied, roughly speaking, the area of the present provinces of Bretagne and Normandie; see v. 53, VII. 75.
P. C. VIII.	4
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIASo	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
Dumnacus]	* Dumnacus driven from his territory, a fugitive and in
hiding, was compelled to make his way alone to the farthest parts of Gaul.’
Chap. 32.
integris rebus]	* while their power was unimpared \
multumpotuisset] ‘had possessed much influence ’: multum is neuter accusative denoting the ‘ extent of action ’ of the verb; cf. Roby § 1094.
semperque auctor] ‘and an advocate of revolution always carried great weight with the barbarians ’.
Uxellodunum] it is now generally agreed that the ancient Uxellodunum was situated on the Puy d’Issolu one of the mountains of the Auvergne, in the department of Lot, between the rivers Dordogne, Tourmente and Sourdoie. It is on the right hand of the railway from Brives to Figeac. The small rivers or streams Tourmente and Sourdoie flow into the Dordogne with an interval of about a mile between ; in this interval and about a mile from the Dordogne is the Puy dTssolu which is from 900 to 1000 feet high.
Chap. 33.
quo...difficile] an awkwardly constructed sentence due to Hirtius’
fondness for relative clauses : * whither, even though no one defended the position, it was nevertheless difficult for armed men to ascend The ablative absolute defendente nullo is virtually a concessive clause and is thus followed by tamen, as in ill. 14 turribus excitatis tamen has altitudo puppium ex barbaris navibus superabat.
27	non modo] for non modo non ; cf. my note on Ii. 17.
excelsissimo loco] of these three camps one is supposed to have been placed on Montbuisson an eminence on the west bank of the Tourmente, the second a little farther north near the village of Marbot, and the third on the north-east of the Puy dTssolu on Pech Demont.
in oppidi circuitum] * round the town ’, ‘so as to make a circuit round the town
Chap. 34.
33	Alesiae]	the siege of Alesia is described at length in vii. 68—89.
similem casum obsessionis] ‘ a like disastrous blockade ’: casus, like j-v/jL<f>opa, a colourless neutral word, meaning ‘ that which befalls ’, ‘ a chance’, came to be used generally in an unfavourable sense ‘mischance ’, ‘ disaster \ obsessionis is genitive of quality or description, cf. the similar phrase sortem incommodi in 1.
p. 18. I. qui..fecerat] ‘ who had experienced that perilous crisis’.
qui partim] the Cadurci, though not unwilling to furnish their
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORN





































52	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
munitione oppidanos circumdare\ circumdare admits of two constructions, (i) urbem muro circumdare, (ii) urbi murum circumdarej an instance of ii occurs in 34 toto oppido munitiones circumdare.
imperat administrari] see note on 27 procedere imperat.
Chap. 38.
M. Antonium quaestorem] the 15 cohorts seem to have consisted of the 10 cohorts of the xiith legion, and half of another legion the other half of which had been sent with C. Fabius to the west of Gaul; cf. 24. What legion was thus divided is not clear; was it the xth ?
sanat] cf. B. C. I. 35 reliqua quae ad eorum sanandas mentes pertinere arbitrabatur commemorat.
superiore commentarid\ VII. 2.
initium belli esse ortum] the pleonasm is common in Caesar, cf.
C. I. 35 ne initium inferendi belli ab Massiliensibus oriatur, and above 6 initium belli nasceretur.
p. 20. 1 Gutruatuni] in vii. 3 the mss all write the name Coiuatusy here they agree in Gutruatus or Gutruatrus. The same person is meant, but it does not follow of necessity that Caesar and Hirtius spelt the name in the same way.
ei accepta referebant] ‘put down to his account’: acceptum referre is a book-keeping phrase meaning ‘to enter as received’ i.e. to enter to the credit side; cf. Cic. Phil. II. 5 omnia mala quae postea vidimus uni accepta referemus Antonio ; Caes. B. C. III. 57 salutem imperii uni omnes acceptam relaturos.
securi feriretur] ‘was beheaded’. He was flogged to death first and then beheaded.
Chap. 39.
ibt] in the country of the Camutes.
se vindicarent in libertatem] ‘should assert their liberty*, lit. ‘should claim themselves for liberty’; see note on 1.
suae provinciae'] ‘his administration*. Caesar’s province was originally conferred on him for 5 years from B.C. 59 to 54, then renewed for another space of 5 years which would terminate in March, 49. The writer refers to the close of the summer of 51, and there was therefore only one more summer season before Caesar’s term of office expired.
quam si sustinere potuissent] * and if they should succeed in holding out through it ’ with quam (aestatem) sustinere cf. V. 39 aegre is dies sustentatur.
Digitized by GOOglCqui subsequeretur] 4 who should follow* i.e. ‘with orders to follow *. iustis] ‘regular*. Supposing Calenus to have been at Cenabum, he may have reached Uxellodunum in 12 or 14 days, the distance being somewhat over 200 miles. Caesar himself who hurried on with the cavalry would probably arrive in 7 or 8 days.
Chap. 40.
flumeti] if the Puy d’lssolu be really the site of Uxellodunum the word flumen must be applied vaguely to four streams, the Sourdoie, Dordogne, Tourmente and a little brook running into the last named, the four forming a circuit round the hill complete save for an interval of one Roman mile where the ground is rugged with a deep cross valley running through it. Kampen remarks that the case is simplified if the Sourdoie originally emptied itself into the Tourmente, which the configuration of the ground shows to have been possible.
ferebatur\ ‘it flowed*.
derivari] ‘ drawn off’, cf. vii. 72 aqua ex flumine derivata, where Holder after the best mss reads dirivata. The sense ‘ to derive ’ (one word from another) is found in Quintilian.
eo] ‘thither*.
33 arduo ascensu] ‘by the steep ascent’: ablative of direction, Roby § 1176-
CHAP. 41.
p, 21« 4 quorum] the sentence is akwardly constructed, the relative having no definite antecedent.
magnus fons aquae] the position of this source has been established almost beyond question by the recent excavations. It issued from the west face of the rock and flowed into the Tourmente. But here a difficulty arises, for Hirtius says that it was on the side where for the space of 300 feet there was a break in the circuit of stream; but this break was on the opposite side and was moreover about a Roman mile in length. Hence Hirtius either makes a mistake, which is quite possible, or we may follow Kampen in supposing that he wrote intervallo rupium and not intervallo fluminis, a conjecture based on the fact that from the position occupied by the Roman camps the Puy dTssolu actually does appear on that side for a distance of exactly 300 feet to be without the steep escarpment which runs round it, elsewhere of visible abruptness, as one may see from the views in Napoleon’s Atlas, but just here of lower height and partially or entirely hidden from view.
Caesar] opposed to reliqui; autem might have been added : in Greek the antithesis would have been expressed by	ol fxiv aAXoi,
Kaleap.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
vineas agere] ‘to move forward*, vineae i.e. penthouses or sheds for sheltering the soldiers while at work.
deterrentur proferre\ an unusual construction : the only other instances
of it quoted by Draeger Hist. Synt. II. § 424 are from Cic. Verr. 1. § 14 commemorare pudore deterreor, Liv. XI,II. 3 sociis deterritis id sacrilegium prohibere and Bell. Afric. (not written by Caesar) 29 and 71.
cuniculos]	these subways have been discovered in the course of the
excavations.
extruitur agger] the mode of construction of an agger has been described in my note on vn. 22.
moenibus\ the wall of the oppidum ; this ran round the crest of the hill above the escarpment of rock and would of course be a great height above the plain, aequare in neuter sense ‘to be equal to* often takes an accusative.
Chap. 42.
25	cupas]	‘tubs’: the inhabitants of Marseilles when besieged adopted
a similar device, B. C. II. 11 cupas taeda ac pice refertas incendunt easque de muro in musculum devolvunt.
scandulis] ‘shingles’.
30 suppressed ‘checked’ in their descent.
comprehendebant\ ‘set fire to’: comprehendere is constantly used as here in reference to fire which ‘catches ’ or ‘gets a hold of’ anything ; it is also sometimes used of the thing burnt which is said to ‘catch’ fire, cf. V. 43 hae (casae) celeriter ignem comprehenderunt, and in 43 of this book opera flamma comprehensa ‘works caught by the flame ’.
p.22.	2	quam	quisque\	—	ut	quisque erat maxime insignis, ita quam
maxime poterat, Doberenz. See appendix.
testatior]	the comparative occurs again in 44; Cicero uses it p.
Cael. 64.
Chap. 43.
complures suos] suorum would be more regular : with suos, complures must be taken as a secondary predicate, ‘saw his men being wounded in great numbers’. Kraner compares I. 52 reperti sunt complures nostri milites.
quid ageretur suspensi] ‘in suspense as to what was going on’.
murisque] a local ablative: some editors insert in.
comprehensa\ cf. note on 42.
etiam] this appears to belong only to the words magna...suorum ‘when even a great part’ etc., and consequently the two clauses cum...Chap. 44.
suam lenitatem] Caesar speaks of his habitual clemency in 1. 14, 31.
exitum] ‘ any successful issue ’.
3	plures] * several tribes’.
indignitate'] ‘indignity*; there is no need to suppose that indignitas here = indignatio.
paucis diebus] for this ablative expressing ‘time in the course of which’ cf. Roby 1182.
cibo se abstinuit] abstinere is here a transitive verb governing se ; it is also used as a neuter verb as in I. 22 proelio abstinebat; both constructions are common.
Lucterius] the sentence is slightly anacoluthic ; instead of continuing Lucterius...ab Epasnacto...deductus est, Hirtius leaves the subject Lucterius without any finite verb, and concludes after the parenthesis hunc Epasnactus... deduxit.
33 quam inimicum] ‘what a bitter foe he was bound to have in Caesar*.
p. 23« i amicissimus] the Arverni and Aedui had been throughout on terms of friendship with the Romans.
populi Romani] amicissimus may be followed by either genitive or dative; with pronouns the dative is usual, cf. B.C. II. 36, Cic. Fam. ill. 10, etc.
Chap. 45.
4 equestre proelium secundum] equestre proelium is regarded as a single expression ‘ cavalry-engagement * and secundum is a qualifying epithet; see note on vii. 30.
Chap. 46.
superioribus aestivis] ‘in the previous summer campaigns*: aestiva (sc. castra) ‘a summer encampment’; the expression is often used to denote that period of the year which is devoted to military operations, when the troops are not stationed in sheltered and permanent winter quarters (kiberna), so it comes to denote ‘a summer campaign*; here the plural seems to be used, not of one campaign, but of the several campaigns of the previous 8 years B.C. 58—51.56	DE	BELLO	GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
devictam subactamque] so far as there is any difference between these two words, subactam denotes the pacification and submission resulting on the complete conquest {devictam).
Aquitaniam] the first sentence of this chapter contains two pairs of strongly antithetic clauses without any particles {sed, autem) to mark the antithesis: (i) Aquitaniam is opposed to Galliam and in omnibus partibus Galliae; the antithesis might be expressed in Greek rrtv /xlv aXKrjv TaWLav..!kKoviTavlav 51. (ii) there is an antithesis between nunquam adisset and per P. Crassum devicisset, in Greek avrbs fibv ov irpo<rr)\0€, $id 5b tov ITou7r\io*' Kpcuraov etc. The nice distinctions conveyed by these small particles in Greek have often to be represented in Latin by emphasis of position in writing or of tone in speaking.
per P. Crassum] this campaign in Aquitania is narrated in ill. 20 foil.
extremum tempus consumeret aestivorum] a spondaic hexameter; in 12 Hirtius wrote an iambic verse.
equitum praesidio]	‘ with a cavalry escort*. Caesar would probably
have added the preposition cum.
Narbonem\ the colony of Narbo Martius now Narbonne; see note on I. 1.	t
P. Vatinio] consul for the last 3 months of the year 47. He was a man of unprincipled character and so unpopular that his name passed into a byword. He was concerned in the prosecution of Sestius in 56 and was fiercely attacked by Cicero who speaks of him as an object of Universal detestation who would die forthwith if he wished to be truly ‘popularis *. See Ellis on Catullus xi v. 3 odissem te odio Vatiniano.
Turonis]	the Turoni or Turones (11. 35, etc.) occupied the present
district of Touraine.
2 5	quae continerent\ ‘ to keep in check ’.
Lemovicum]	the name of the Lemovices survives in the province
Limousin and the town Limoges.
vacua ab exercitu] for vacuus ab cf. II. 12, ill. 1, etc; so vacare ab Liv. vii. 1.
conventus] ‘assize towns’: conventus was the term applied to a special meeting of the inhabitants of a provincial town for the administration of justice, etc., and the town itself in which such meeting was periodically held came to be also called conventus.
quam] sc. defectionem : it was through the loyalty of the province and the aid that it furnished that Caesar had been able to hold out
33 against (bear the brunt of) the defection of Gaul.
p. 24. 1 hibernavit] Caesar always has hiemare.
2 Nemetocennae] possibly, but not certainly, Arras, in the province of Artois, both named after the Atrebates. Nemetocenna is one of
Digitized by GOOglCvulnerationem] the word is somewhat rare: for the event see 23.
semper] ‘ had always been accustomed to hold himself in readiness to serve his fellow-countrymen in any rising ’.
auctor armorum] a person who gives the weight of his authority or sanction to any undertaking is said to be its auctor, cf. hi. 17 auctores belli, v. 33 profectionis auctor, vi. 8 defectionis auctores, 31 consilii auctor. For the addition of dux cf. Cic. Fam. 11. 6 dux ?iobis et auctor opus est.
parente Romanis civitate] ‘ while his state was in subjection to the Romans ’, a mere repetition of civitas in officio esset.
infestis itineribus] ‘by making raids’; see note on infestus in 48.
Chap. 48.
12 attributus] ‘attached’: this is the regular phrase for appointments of this kind, cf. VII. 90 huic Af. Semproniu?n Rutilum attribuit.
16 quo libentius] ‘ which would make him more inclined to carry out his orders
perfideni] ‘under a pledge of safety’; cf. I. 46 committendum non
putabat, ut pulsis hostibus dici posset eos ab se per fidem in colloquio circumventos.
imposita] inferre, not imponere, is the usual word for * to inflict ’ a wound.
paucosque nostros] ‘ our men who were few in number ’ not * a few of our men ’.
lanceaque infesta] infestus (from in and fendo ‘to cast at’, ‘aim at’) is frequently thus used as an epithet of weapons and denotes the threatening position in which they are held, cf. B. C. III. 93 infestis pilis procucurrissent: the word is a favourite with Vergil who, with other writers, often uses it in the more general sense of ‘ hostile ’. Here we may translate * with a thrust of his lance ’.
non dubitant resistere] non dubitare ‘not to hesitate’ is frequently thus followed by an infinitive, cf. II. 23 transire non dubitaverunt and58	DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
see Mr Reid’s note on Cic. de Senect. 16 for the different constructions of dubito.
32	proteruntur]	* trampled to death 4 ridden down *: 4 to trample
under foot * is the usual meaning of proterere which is sometimes found united with pedibus: the lexicon will supply examples, e.g. Val. Flacc. VI. 522, proterit impulsu gravis agmina, corporaque atris | sternit equis.
p. 25. ut) if the text be right (see appendix! ut is of course not final but consecutive, following sic graviter 4 so seriously wounded as to seem in imminent danger of death ’.
expiato suo dolore] 4 because his resentment was now appeased.’
obsidibus datis firmat) 4 pledges himself by the surrender of hostages ’: similar words in a different sense occur in 27.
scio Caesarem) if this statement is to be taken strictly Hirtius here asserts his knowledge of the fact that Caesar wrote a commentary of the events of 51, thus confirming my conjecture of commentarios...non comparentes supplevi in the preface.
L. Paulo, C. Marcello) B.c. 50. L. Aemilius Paulus; son of M. Aemilius Lepidus, was an adherent of the oligarchical party, and in 63 had been one of Catiline’s accusers. Caesar now won him qver by the gift of large sums of money (Suet. Caes. xxix.). His colleague C. Claudius Marcellus was a cousin of M. Claudius Marcellus the consul of the previous year, and was a strong opponent of Caesar, though distantly connected with him by marriage.
magno opere) for the position of this word cf. Caelius ap. Cic. Fam. vili. 1 ut nunc est, nulla magno opereexpectatio est. Kraner qu. Liv. in. 26 nulla magno opere clade accepta.
Galliae) genitive after res gestas as in the preface.
Chap. 49.
sub decessu suo) ‘on the eve of his departure’ ‘just at the moment of his departure’; cf. v. 13 sub bruma, B. C. I. 27 sub ipsa profectione. Caesar was naturally anxious to leave Gaul in a state of pacification, in view of the serious political crisis that he would have to face in Rome.
decessu) decessus, decessio, decedere are recognised terms for the retirement of a magistrate from a provincial administration, cf. 50 Caesaris decedentis gratiam convellere cupiebant.
22 sine praesenti periculo) ‘if there were no immediate danger’ (in doing so).
condicione parendi meliore) ‘by ameliorating the conditions of their obedience ’.
Chap. 50.
contra consuetudinem) hitherto Caesar had spent the summer in Gaul; this year, Gaul no longer requiring his presence, he repaired to Italy.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA29 M. Antonii] the death of Q. Hortensius, the well-known orator, in May of this year, left a vacancy in the college of augurs. Two candidates appeared in the field, representatives of the two political parties then striving for supremacy in the Roman state, L. Domitius Ahenobarbus put forward by the optimates, the Pompeian party, and M. Antonius who had the support of Caesar. The election took place apparently in June and Antonius was successful. The collegium of augurs consisted at this time of 15 members, Caesar afterwards raised the number to 16.
contendebat gratia] lit ‘he strove with his influence’ i.e. ‘he exerted his influence’: the ablative gratia standing thus by itself is rather harsh and it is just possible that omni has fallen out after enim.
33 factionem et potentiam] ‘ factious opposition and undue influence ’: potentia like dominatio generally denotes power of an irregular or excessive kind, whereas potestas is usually recognised or legitimate power. Tacitus An. 1. 1 affords a good illustration of the use of these words: neque decemviralis potestas ultra biennium neque tidbunorum militum consulare ius diu valuit. non Cinnae, non Sullae, longa dominatio; et Pompei Crassique potentia cito in Caesarem, Lepidi atque Antonii arma in Augustum cessere.
paucorum] ‘ the few ’, cf. the term ol 6\lyoi so well known in Greek political history. Pompey was now the leader of the oligarchical party; cf. 52 certior que fiebat id agi paucorum consiliis,
P* 26. i* decedentis] ‘retiring’ from his province at the close of his term of office.
2 attingeret] the subject is no doubt Caesar.
municipia et colonias] the municipal towns were organised communities of Italians which for the most part retained their original constitution and were granted some, and after the lex Iulia of 90, all of the privileges of Roman burgesses. Under the term coloniae are included probably both the true coloniae civium Romanorum of which there were now 4 in Cisalpine Gaul and also the Latin colonies of Strabo for which see my note on 24, and Kraner on the present passage.
quod...praestitissent^ ‘because they had granted Antonius their crowded attendance and zealous aid ’.
honorem suum] Caesar was a candidate for the consulship of 48. That he should hold this office was one of the stipulations of the conference at Luca in the spring of 56 (cf. note on ill. 7). A brief account of the constitutional difficulties involved in Caesar’s candidature will be found in a note at the end of this edition.
sequentis anni] B.c. 49, because the consuls for 48 would be elected during the course of the previous year.
8 L. Lentulum et C. Marcellum] these were the consuls of B.c. 49. L. Cornelius Lentulus Crus had been one of the prosecutors of P. Clodius in 61. He was overwhelmed with debt (B. C. I. 4) and his
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLLCO. [Comm. VIII.
party seem to have entertained some fear of his being bought by Caesar (Lange, Ro?nische Alterthiimer in. “268). His colleague C. Claudius Marcellus was a cousin of the Marcellus mentioned above, 48, as one of the consuls of B.c. 50, and a brother of the Marcellus who was consul in 51.
9	qui spoliarent] * for the purpose of despoiling ’. The usual construc
tion of spoliare is spoliare aliquem aliqua re, cf. 52 ut Caesar aliqua parte exercitus spoliaretur. The construction in the present passage is as if one were to say ‘ to rob a man’s watch ’ instead of 4 to rob a man of his watch ’.
Ser. Galbae] Ser. Sulpicius Galba had been one of Caesar’s legati in Gaul; cf. 111. 1—6. He was put forward as the Caesarian candidate for the consulship of 49.
cum] ‘although’.
quod] this clause contains the reason of ereptum Ser. Galbae consulatum : the consulship had been snatched from him because he was a friend of Caesar.
legationis] Galba’s post as legatus.
Chap. 61.
illo] ‘that famous’.
hostiae] so far as there is a distinction between hostiae and victimae, the former denotes the smaller animals offered in sacrifice, such as sheep, pigs etc., while victimae is used of the larger.
tricliniis] an allusion to the lectisternium or ‘Feast of couches’ when figures of the Gods were placed on couches {lecti or triclinia) which were strewn (strata) with rich coverlets ; food was then set before them. The lectisternia appear to have been sometimes held in the open squares {fora) as well as in the temples ; hence foris should perhaps be retained in Liv. XL. 59 in foris (Weissenbom fanis) publicis, ubi lectisternium erat, deorum capita quae in lecti$ erant averterunt se lanxque (mss lanaque) cum integumentis quae Iovi apposita fuit decidit de mensa. For the celebration in fana cf. Liv. xxxvi. 1, XLII. 30.
ut...posset] ‘so that people might get a foretaste of the joy of his eagerly expected triumph’, vel belongs only to expectatissimi which it serves to emphasise.
cupiditas] ‘eagerness’ to welcome Caesar.
Chap. 62.
Nemetocennam] see note on 46 end. This review was held in September.
26 lustravit] ‘reviewed’: a military review was accompanied with certain religious ceremonies, hence the use of lustrare which is a word taken from the Roman ritual and means properly ‘ to purify’.conciliaretur]	the subject is Gallia. Caesar thought that the presence
and influence of his able and successful lieutenant Labienus would induce the inhabitants of Gallia togata (north Italy) to look favourably on his candidature for the consulship. Caesar had not yet had reason to mistrust Labienus who afterwards turned traitor, although as we learn from this chapter there were already rumours afloat that he was being tampered with by the opposite party.
paucorum] used as in 50 of the oligarchical party.
interposita] cf. vii. 34 hoc decreto interposito.
senatus auctoritate] auctoritas se?iatus denotes properly speaking the expressed consent of the senate to any measure before its formal ratification when it becomes a senatusconsultum. As one might expect the phrase is sometimes loosely used for senatusconsultum as in the present passage. If the auctoritas failed to become law it was nevertheless written down and recorded, cf. Cic. Fam. VIII. 8 § 6—8 where three auctoritates are given in full.
aliqua parte] two legions, cf. 54.
spoliaretur] cf. note on qui spoliarent in 50,
p. 27. i contra senatus auctoritatem] Caesar determined to keep as far as possible within the lines of the constitution and to throw on his adversary the responsibility of being the first to depart from them.
liberis sententiis] ‘so long as their opinions were free’, ‘if the senators were allowed the free expression of their opinions ’.
obtineri] lit. ‘was being gained’; the future event is regarded as in course of present fulfilment. Hirtius might have written causam suam facile se obtenturum.
Curio] called by Suetonius violentissimus tribunorum • he was a clever and unprincipled profligate whom Caesar attached to himself by paying his debts. He died fighting bravely at the battle of the Bagrada (Merjerdah) near Utica in Africa B. c. 49. A brief statement of the part that he took at this period will be found in my note at the end of the book.
dominatio atque arma] see note on 50 factionem et potentiam and the passage from Tacitus there quoted.
discederet.. .dimitteret] jussive subjunctives rather abruptly introduced, ‘let each disarm and disband his army’: Roby § 1606.
sui iuris] genitive of quality, treated as a secondary predicate; so Liv. xxv. 29 cum arbitrii nostri esse coeperimus, xxxi. 45 nec se potestatis suae esse respondebant, cf. Roby §1282: tr. * the state will be its own master’.
sc per discessionem] sc is the usual contraction for senatusconsultum. A discessio ‘division’ was effected thus: the senators who wished to vote
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII.
for the proposed measure walked to one side of the senate house and those opposed to it to the other. Those who voted for the measure were said ire in sententiam, while the others were said in alia omnia transire, cf. 53 senatus frequens in alia omnia transiit. On the occasion, in question the division seems to have actually taken place, 370 members voting for Curio’s resolution and 22 against it; but by some means or other the Pompeian party managed to prevent the senatorial decree embodying the terms of the resolution from being passed. The magnum hoc testimonium of the next chapter clearly refers to some decisive expression of opinion on the part of the Senate as a body (universi) in Caesar’s favour, for Hirtius compares it with a similar proceeding of the previous year when the senate voted against a resolution of Marcellus framed in opposition to Caesar’s interests. The testimonium then must be this decisive division in favour of Curio’s motion that Pompey and Caesar should both simultaneously disband their armies, which motion, it must be remembered, was thoroughly approved by Caesar if not actually suggested by him.
12	evicerunt] ‘succeeded in preventing it from taking place’: evincere
is ‘to gain one’s point’ the object successfully attained being expressed by an ut (ne) clause, cf. Liv. xxxvm. 9 partim consilio partim precibus evicit ut permitterent se Romanis. I read evicerunt for iusserunt and morando for moderando with most recent editors in obedience to Mommsen and Madvig. See appendix.
Chap. 63.
superiori] ‘previous’; Hirtius goes on to explain what this previous action was.
proximo anno] B.c. 51. The consuls were M. Claudius Marcellus (cousin of the consul of 50 and brother of the consul of 49, cf. note on 50) and Ser. Sulpicius Rufus.
legem Pompei et Crassi] the lex Pompeia Licinia (thus named after its two authors Cn. Pompeius and M. Licinius Crassus consuls for the second time B.c. 55) was proposed early in the spring of 55. In accordance With the private arrangement made at the conference of Luca (see note on III. 7) it prolonged Caesar’s command for an additional space of 5 years from March 54 to March 4Q. According to Plutarch Pomp. Li 1. this law was proposed by the tribune C. Trebonius at the instigation of Pompey and Crassus, but see Mommsen Hist. iv. 312 (Engl. Trans.), Rechtsfrage p. 40 note, Lange Rom. Alt. ill2 338.
ante tempus] as Caesar’s command did not expire till 49, it was ‘premature’ of Marcellus to bring forward proposals in September 51 about his retirement from his command and the appointment of his successors. The lex Pompeia Licinia may have contained a clause providing that this question should not be discussed before March 50. Lange Rom. Alt. in* 383.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNCapp. 52—54.]
provinciis] three in number, the two Gauls and Illyria.
sententiis] the senators were called on in turn to express their opinion on the question submitted to them. This expression of opinion was called sententia.
ex Caesaris invidid] ‘from Caesar’s disrepute’ i.e. by bringing Caesar into disrepute.
in alia omnia transiit\ see note on 52 sc per discessionem : alia omnia means strictly ‘anything else’, i.e. either the direct opposite of the proposal submitted or some third course.
2i	quo maiores] ‘to provide stronger methods of compulsion.whereby to
force the senate’.
Chap. 54.
24	senatusconsultum] this decree seems to have been passed in June.
bellum Parthicum\ it was in 65 that difficulties first arose between the Romans and the Parthians, but war was not declared till 56. Crassus went out as commander in chief in 54, his defeat and death took place in June of the following year ; his place was taken temporarily by Gaius Cassius Longinus till the appointment of M. Bibulus as Governor of Syria andr M. Tullius Cicero of Cilicia in March 51. Unfavourable news arrived from Bibulus in May 59 and next month it was decreed that two legions should be sent out under L. Marius.
26 neque obscure] as Hirtius goes on to explain, Pompey had lent one legion to Caesar (see my note on vi. 1) and Pompey now gives up that legion for the Parthian war, thus virtually depriving Caesar of two legions without weakening his own position.
earn] redundant, the object of dedit being legionem primam.
cum] concessive ‘although’: notice that tamen which logically follows the concessive clause is yet here placed before it.
suoru??i] the reflexive pronoun is used as if dubius esset had preceded instead of dubium esset ei, Doberenz.
3r in Gallia citeriore] the xvth was one of the legions under the command of Labienus (see my note on 2) who had Just been stationed in hither Gaul.
33	quae praesidia] perhaps Hirtius wrote quae ea praesidia.
p. 28.	* C. Trebonium] one of the tribunes of 55 and consul for the
last three months of 45. Though one of Caesar’s trusted officers he joined the conspiracy against his master. He was himself treacherously murdered by Dolabella in 43.
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA64 DE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VIII. Cap. 55.]
Chap. 65,
9 deberent dnci\ ‘were to have been taken’.
in Italia retentas] cf. B. C. 1. 2 timere Caesarem ereptis ab eo duabus legionibus, ne ad eius periculum reservare et retinere eas ad urbem Pompeius videretur; 4 (Pompeius) simul infamia duarum legionum permotus, quas ab itinere Asiae Syriaeque ad suam potentiam dominatumque converterat, rem ad arma deduci studebat.
quam belligerandi] the sentence would have been more logical if Hirtius had written simply iurepotius disceptandi quam bello.
contendit—] we may reasonably suppose that there is not much missing. It is idle to conjecture how the gap should be filled up.