p. 1, 4 Gtieo Pompeio proconsule] Pompey had held the consulship in 70 B.c. and again in 55. This book relates the events of the year 53.
quoniam...remaneret] this clause forms a part of Caesar’s application to Pompey and contains one of the reasons for that application, hence the subjunctive remaneret; cf. 7. Pompey had received the two Spanish provinces in 55 B.c. for 5 years, but instead of undertaking their administration in person he had left it to subordinates and had himself remained in Italy. At this time he was nominally occupied with the management of the corn supply but was really engaged in watching the progress of political events at Rome. Being still in possession of the military imperium he could not actually enter the city. Hence Caesar speaks of him as remaining near the city, ad urbem.
Sacramento rogavisset] cf. Liv. XL. 26 ut omnes minores quinquaginta annis sacramento rogaret, so XXXII. 261 ‘to administer the oath of allegiance’; the phrase means literally ‘to request (allegiance) by means of an oath’, consulis sacramentum an oath of allegiance to the ConsuL
iuberet] after petit which is an historical present and may therefore be followed by the imperfect subjunctive.
Galliae] subjective genitive; ‘the opinion entertained by Gaul’.
augeri] Caesar is writing rather vaguely: of course augere detrimentum would naturally mean ‘to increase a disaster’, i. e. to make it a greater disaster than it was before, but Caesar means by augeri ‘more than counterbalanced*.
amicitiae] though Caesar foresaw and was preparing for the approaching struggle between himself and Pompey he found it convenient at present to maintain as far as possible their previous friendly relations. Julia, Pompey’s wife and Caesar’s daughter, had died the year before, 54, and Caesar thereupon proposed a fresh
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLLCO.	[Comm. VI.
alliance between the two families which Pompey however rejected. The loan of troops here mentioned indicates that the show of friendship was still maintained between the two rivals.
per sttos] ‘by means of his agents’, i. e. the legati mentioned above.
Q. Titurio] cf. v. 36, 37. A legion and a half (15 cohorts in all) had perished in this disastrous engagement; thus the present addition of three legions, of which one was lent by Pompey, while the other two were levied by Caesar’s legati, just doubled the number of troops that had been lost, cf. Plutarch Caes. xxv, Cato Minor xlv, Pomp. LII, Cic. Fam. vm. 4, Appian B. C. II. 29, [Caesar] B. G. vm. 54. A comparison of these passages will show a strange discrepancy, inasmuch as it is stated in some that Pompey lent Caesar two legions, in others that he lent him one. Plutarch even contradicts himself. Nipperdey has shown to demonstration that Pompey only lent one legion; Goler controverting a similar view held by Drumann writes with great carelessness (Caesar’s Gallischer Krieg p. 205, ed. 2). The new legions were numbered I, xiv, XV, of these I. was lent by Pompey, B. G. VIIJ. 54, and the xivth took the place of the original Xivth destroyed at Aduatuca: the legions already in Gaul were numbered from vil. to XIII. inclusive. Thus Caesar now had altogether 10 legions.
Chap. 2.
ad...defertur] so in TT. 14 ad hum totius belli summam deferri, but in v. 6 Caesar writes sibi regnum deferri.
Treveris] a powerful tribe of Keltic Gauls occupying the district of Trier; Augusta Treverorum (Tr&ves) was subsequently their chief town. The Eburones seem to have been clientes of the Treveri, cf. iv. 6.
impetrare] ‘gain their request*; the word is used absolutely in I. 9.
p. 2. 7 obsidibus cavent] so vil. 2; ‘interchange hostages for the payment of money’.
Ambiorigem] Ambiorix shared with Catuvolcus the sovereignly of the Eburones, cf. v. 24, infra 31.
Nervios] Bagacum (Bavay) was the chief stronghold of the Nervii. They occupied a part of Hainault and Flanders. The Aduatuci were situated in the neighbourhood of the Meuse in a part of the province of Namur. We learn from v. 27 that the Eburones had formerly paid them tribute. The Menapii dwelt for the most part between the Scheldt and the Rhine.
Cisrhenanis] the dwellers on the Gallic side of the Rhine; cf. II. 3 Germanos qui cis Rhenum incolunt.
Senones] their chief town was Agedincum now Sens.
ad imperatum non venire] cf. V. 54 where it is said that Caesar
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIACapp. i—4]	NOTES.	25
had summoned the whole senatus of the Senones but they had refused to attend.
Carnutibus'] their chief oppidum was Cenabum, afterwards civitas Aurelianorum, Orleans.
Chap. 3.
10 proximis] it will be remembered that Caesar had spent the winter in Gaul in or near Samarobriva (Amiens). The four legions consisted probably of the three which Caesar had under his command together with that under the command of Fabius who was stationed among the Morini, perhaps at St Pol: cf. v. 24, 46, 53.
in hibema] no doubt at Amiens.
ut instituerat] ‘according to his practice’. In V. 2 it is said that the Treveri neque ad concilia veniebant neque imperio parebant.
belli ac dejectionis] a slight verrepo* rpbrepov: defectio	precedes
bellum.
ut omnia postponere videretur] ‘that they might see that he considered everything else of secondary moment’. Cf. V. 7 omnibus rebus postpositis: the word is said not to occur in Cicero.
Lutetiam Parisiorum] the ancient Lutetia	was situated	on the
island now occupied by the cit^ : cf. vu. 57 Lutetiam proficiscitur, id est oppidum Parisiorum quod positum est in insula fiuminis Sequanae. Strabo speaks of a town of the Parisii called A€ukotokIci. Cf. Desjardins II. 474 foil.
consilio] the consilium belli.
pro suggestu] suggestus a raised platform, cf. b. Afr. 54 de suggesiut 86pro suggestu tribuit: pro seems to mean ‘from the front of’.
Chap. 4.
26	conantibus] probably an abl. abs., possibly	dative after nuntiatur.
28	Aeduos] the Aedui were always on terms	of friendship	with the
Romans; they were an important tribe dwelling between the Loire and the Saone : cf. I. 33 note.
30	quod...arbitratur] ‘because he thinks that the summer should be
devoted to the impending war and not to investigation’.
obsidibus...tradit] for the form of this sentence cf. v. 4 principibus convocatis...hos conciliavit and ill. 14 note.
eodem] no doubt to Agedincum (Sens); cf. 3 in Senones proficiscitur.
usi deprecatoribus Remis] cf. I. 9 legatos ad Dumnongem Aeduum mittunt ut eo deprecatore a Sequanis impetrarent.
p# 3«	1 Remis] a Belgic tribe occupying a district corresponding
roughly to the departments of Marne and Ardennes. Their chief
p. c. vi.	3
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VI.
town was Durocortorum afterwards called Remi or Rheims. Caesar here says that the Carnutes were clientes of the Remi. M. Desjardins seems to have overlooked this passage in his account of the two tribes.
Chap. 5.
3 totus et mente et animo] one may perhaps render this by the common English expression ‘with all his heart and soul’: cf. note on in. 19.
Cavarinum] Caesar had appointed Cavarinus king of the Senones ; in the previous year he had been expelled from his kingdom by an insurrection, v. 54.
ex huius iracundia] ‘from his resentment’, which he might show by taking vengeance on the authors of the insurrection against his authority, civitatis is the genitive after motus.
pro explorato habebat] Caesar might have written exploratum habebat: cf. the common phrase pro certo habere.
animo circumspiciebat] Cic. leg. II. 42 circumspicite celeriter
animo qui sint rerum exitus consecuti.
Eburonum] the Eburones dwelt between the Meuse and the Rhine, north of Aix la Chapclle.
16 se in Menapios abderet] ‘should hide himself among the Menapii’: in with the acc. is the usual construction with abdere se.
18 ad Labienum in Treveros] cf. 7 Labienum cum una legione quae in eorum (Treverorum) finibus hiemaverat: but in v. 24 it is said that Labienus’ winter quarters were among the Remi in confinio Treverorum. Napoleon suggests that he may have been stationed on debateable territory claimed by both tribes. Of course the boundaries of these half-civilised tribes were never as clearly defined as are the limits of modern states.
Chap. 6.
pontibus] raised dams or causeways across the marshes: cf. VII. 19; Tac. An. 1. 63.
27 confirmat] ‘assures them’: below in his confirmatis rebus the word is used in a slightly different sense, ‘these matters having been definitely arranged ’, ‘set on a firm footing’.
si...recepissent] ‘if they should receive’, i. e. ‘if (it should prove that) they had received’, hence the pluperfect.
29	Commium] Commius had been appointed king of the Atrebates
by Caesar in 55 B. c., cf. IV. 21.
Chap. 7.
32 magtiis...copiis] cf. v. 3 haec civitas (Treverorum) longe plurimum totius Galliae equitatu valet magnasque habet copias peditum, Ii. 24.Capp. 4—8]	NOTES\	27
p. 4. i iamque aberant cum...cognoscunt] cf. Roby II. § 1733 ‘the coincidence in time is sometimes vividly expressed by an inversion; what would otherwise have been the temporal clause being put first as an independent sentence (often with iam) and what would have been the principal sentence being subjoined with cum, often cum repente, cum interim, etc. cum=et tum\ Cf. vii. 26 iamque...apparabant cum matresfamiliae repente procurrerunt. There is a similar sentence at the beginning of the next Chapter.
1 duas legiones] supra 5 duas legiones ad eum proficisci iubet.
10 ftumen] perhaps the Alzette, supposing Labienus to have been encamped at Lavacherie on the Ourthe.
13 quoniam...dicantur] cf. the similar dependent clause quoniam... remaneret in 1.
16 ut...cogebat] ‘some out of the great number of (Caesar’s) Gallic horsemen being under a natural compulsion to sympathise with the Gallic fortunes .
18 ordinibus] ordo here as elsewhere is used for centurio.
fert consuetudo] cf. IV. 32 quam consuetudo ferrety note.
fugae similem] fugae is probably genitive; see note on v. 53 but cf. infra 27 consimilis capris; v. 12.
in tanta propinquitate castrorum] ‘owing to the two camps being so near to each other
Chap. 8.
vix agmen...processer at cum Galli...non dubitant] for the form of this sentence see the quotation from Roby’s grammar in the note on the last chapter.
26 longum esse] ‘it would be a wearisome task’. It should be remembered that ‘it w'ould take long’ is always longum est not longum esset.
28	dignitatem] ‘sense of honour*.
31	citra flumen] i.e. to his own side of the river.
p, 5. 3 nobis ducibus] not for the singular vie duce (or mi hi duel); Labienus associates the other officers with himself.
9 infestis signis] ‘in hostile array*; the phrase is very common, sometimes pila is put in place of signa as in B.C. in. 93 infestis pilis procucurrissent followed shortly after by infestis signis.
10 impetum modo] ‘the bare onset’; cf. VII. 76 aspectum modo ‘the bare aspect*.
recepit] * received into allegiance *.
18 demonstravimus] see v. 3 Cingetorix...ad eum venit, se suosque omnes in officio futuros neque ab amicitia populi Romani defecturos confirmavit.
3—2
Original from
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VI.
principatus atque imperium est traditum] the participle is made to agree with the last noun: contrast with this the-opening sentence of Cicero de Legibus—lucus quidem ille et haec Arpinatium quercus agnoscitur saepe a me lectus in Mario.
Chap. 9.
22	miserant] the subject is Germani, to be gathered from the context.
Kraner points out that with the indicative miserant which makes the clause an independent one eum would be more natural than sc. The reflexive pronoun is not unfrequently found in prepositional formulae, such as propter se, per se, pro se etc. where se denotes the logical, not the grammatical, subject of the sentence; cf. Draeger Hist. Synt. I. § 28 h.
locum] it is generally supposed that Caesar crossed the Rhine in 56 at Bonn; see note on iv. 18. Goler (ed. 2) who placed the first crossing at Urmitz between Neuwied and Coblenz places the second a short distance below Coblenz near the villages of Kesselheim and Vallendar, where the bridging would be facilitated by the two islands Nieder-Werth and Gras-Werth.
nota atque instituta ratione] this is probably a modal abl. going with efficitur; ‘the work is accomplished after the known and established method’: it would be possible however to regard the abl. as absolute, in which case tr. ‘the method (of bridging) being well known and established
Ubii] the Ubii occupied a large district on the right bank of the Rhine, extending, roughly speaking, from Muhlheim to Wiesbaden. Their submission to Caesar is mentioned in iv. r6.
purgandi sui] cf. note on III. 4 sui recipiendi.
p. 6# 1. vellct] Caesar writes the past tense vellet in the dependent clause, as if he were going to write the perfect polliciti sunt in the principal clause.
2 cognita Caesar causa] the nom. Caesar is inserted in the middle of the abl. abs. as in 11. n, v. 49, vii. 1, 6.
Chap. 10.
cis nationibus]	such as the	Usipetes	and	Tencteri. The Ubii
themselves were once tributaries (vectigales) of the Suebi but were freed from their thraldom by Caesar in 55 B. c.
denuntiare] ‘were issuing mandates’; denuntiare is used of solemn or threatening announcements or commands.
10 barbaros atque	imperitos homines] in	IV.	3 Caesar speaks of
the Ubii as being	more refined	than the	other	German tribes owing
to their proximity	to the Gauls	and to the humanising traffic of the
Rhine.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINOTES.
Bacenis] the exact limits of this forest cannot now be discovered: see Goler (ed. 2) p. 36, 37. The present Thuringerwald would seem to have formed the beginning of the Silva Bacenis. The greater part of Germany was at this time covered with forests and swamps; cf. Tac. Germ. 5 terra etsi aliquanto specit differt in universum tamen aut silvis horrida aut paludibus foeda.
pro stativo muro] ‘as a natural wall*: cf. pro aride IV. 17, ‘as a support
Cheruscos] the Chenisci classed by Strabo among the ivSclarepa iOvT) Tepuaviicd seem to have been situated in the neighbourhood of Leipzig, between the Elbe and Weser.
Cheniscos...prohibere] the two constructions prohibere aliquem ab aliquo 'to keep one person off another’, and prohibere aliquem aliqua re ‘to keep a person from a course of action , are here united. ‘To keep the Cherusd off the Suebi and the Suebi off the Cherusci, from making marauding incursions *.
initium silvae] probably the Thuringerwald, forming the western boundary of the Silva Bacenis.
Chap. 11.
proponere] there is a slight zeugma here; some such phrase as perpauca scribere would be more suitable to de Galliae Germaniaeque moribus than proponere.
partibusque] if this word be genuine, of which there is some doubt, it must be vaguely used in the sense of ‘districts’.
singulis domibus] Caesar probably means that it sometimes occurred that some members of a household attached themselves to one party^ factio, in the community, while the others belonged to another; thus the house would be divided against itself. These factiones were the necessary result of the undue predominance of the Gallic nobles who formed large bodies of adherents by compelling ‘the common freemen who wTere oppressed by the load of debt to borrow from them and to surrender their freedom first de facto as debtors, then de iure as bondmen’, Mommsen iv. 223. It was naturally the interest of these nobles to protect their clientes from oppression as they formed the main support of their own power.
29 eorum] ‘of the Gauls’: so in 1. 1 eorum una pars% where by eorum is meant the inhabitants of Gaul though they had not been distinctly mentioned in the immediate context: of course eorum here is not the antecedent to quorum.
quorum...redeat] not redit because Caesar is giving the reason of their auctontas: ‘who are held by their fellow-countrymen to have the chief authority, inasmuch as to their decision and judgement falls the supreme direction of all action and counsel ’.
31 redeat} Kraner qu. B. C. 1.4 se alterum fore Sullam ad quem summa imperii redeat, III. 18 « mortuo ad netninem unum summa imperii redit.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VI.
itaque] 'and this practice seems to have originated with the object of preventing any one of the plebs from lacking aid against the more powerful’; ita should be taken with institutum (Doberenz). It is not easy to follow Caesar’s reasoning here.
opprimi et circumveniri] ‘overwhelmed and oppressed*. The two words are similarly united in Cic. Verr. II. 4. 17 quid te a...Siciliae civitatibus circumveniri atque opprimi dicis ?
1. si faciat...habet] a slight irregularity of syntax for si faciat... habeat: according to Draeger Hist. Synt. 11. p. 690 this is the only instance in Caesar; he quotes a few examples from Cicero.
totius Galliae] genitive after ratio not after summa.
Chap. 12.
Sequani] sometimes the Sequani and sometimes the Arverni are spoken of as the leading power in Gaul opposed to the Aedui; cf. I. 31 locutus est pro his Divitiacus Aeduus; Galliae totius factiones esse duas; harum alterius principatum tefiere Aeduos alterius Arvernos: in the following sentence the Sequani are classed with the Arvemi whose clientes they were, while still a few sentences further on we find the Sequani mentioned alone as receiving the submission of the Aedui, and afterwards peius victoribus Sequanis quam Aeduis viciis accidisse.
iacturis] ‘sacrifices’, ‘concessions*.
nobilitate] so Divitiacus says, I. 31, omnem nobilitatem, omnem senatum, omnem equitatum amisisse.
Divitiacus] the a in the Gallic suffix -acus is always long, so Vale tiacus (vii. 32), Dumnacus (vm. 26), Caratacus, Calgacus (Tacitus). Cuno, Vorgeschichte Roms I. 338.
Rumam ad senatum profectus] cf. I. 31 se ex civitate profugisse et Romam ad senatum venisse auxilium postulatum.
dignitateque] it is worth remarking that que is not very often thus placed after a short e.
RemV] the Remi alone stood aloof from the Belgic coalition against Caesar in 57 B.C., cf. 11. 3.
quos...intellegebatur] ‘and because it was understood that they were on an equality with the Aedui in favour with Caesar*. Aeduos must be understood after adaequare: in B. C. II. 16 nostros should probably be read, not nostris.
Chap. 13.
numero] ‘account’: cf. Cicero’s expression Phil. III. 16 Bambalio quidam homo nullo numero: so in Greek api6/x6s} as in the oracle relating to the Megarians, v/xeis Si u> Meyapcfc ofare rplroc ofrre rlraproi | oure SvuSIkcltoi out’ iv \6y(p our iv aptOpap.
i acre alicno] Sir H. Maine, commenting on the fact that in ancient history we always find the lower orders deeply indebted to the aristocratic orders, remarks that the cause is to be found chiefly in the different relative importance of Land and Capital
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGININOTES.
in those days and the present. Land was then plentiful while capital or stock was with difficulty obtained and w*as lodged chiefly in the hands of the nobles who lived by war. The possession of instruments of tillage was of paramount importance to all classes and to obtain these as well as other necessaries the commonalty were obliged to borrow from the nobles at usurious interest, and this resulted in the degradation and ultimate servitude of the borrowers. Early History of Institutions p. 167 foil.
4 sed] resumptive, referring back to genera sunt duo,
dmidum] the word Druides is generally supposed to be connected with 8pv* oak, Old Irish daur oak, drui, n. pi. druid, the priest of the oak-groves. Curtius Gr. Etym. p. 739 (ed. 5). This derivation is however disputed by M. d’Arbois de Jubainville; cf. Desjardins II. 514 note.
According to Strabo IV. 4. 4, there were three religious orders in Gaul : Trapd. Traci 8' u>$ brlTcav rpla <pOXa rCov Tiptupttvujv btatpepbvrus tori, fidpbot re Kal ovaret* Kal 8pvL8at' dpdot ptbv vfivrjral teal Trotrjrai, ovaret5 8b ieporotol Kal (pvotoXbyot, SpvlSat 8b icpbt ry tpwrtoXoyUf, Kal rrjv ijdtKrjv <fnXo<ro<pLav doKoucrt. M. d’Arbois de Jubainville shows from the most ancient Irish Chronicles relating to the beginnings of the Christian era that these three religious orders were represented in Ireland by the drui, the file, the representative of the vates and the bard or bartk. Caesar does not clearly distinguish the three orders mentioned by Strabo.
6 procurant\ ‘ look after*, ‘ manage*; hence the procurator (well-known in its abbreviated form of ‘proctor’) one who looks after another’s affairs. It need hardly be said that procurare never means to ‘procure ’.
8 hi] the Druides, cos the Gauls.
de omnibus controversiis] cf. Strabo 1. c. Stratbrarot 8b vojd^ovrat (8pvl8at) Kal 81a rovro mcrevovrat ras re IbiuriKd* Kplacts Kal rds koiv&i, wore Kal TroXbjLovs dtyrwv lcpbrepov kcu TrapararrecQai fibXXovras (Tcavov, rdy 5e <povtKd* SUat fiaXtora rovrots irrerlrpaicro StKafeiv. ‘The Gauls’, says Mommsen, ‘ were not much removed from an ecclesiastical state with its popes and councils, its immunities, interdicts, and spiritual courts; only this ecclesiastical state did not like that of recent times stand aloof from the nation, but was on the contrary preeminently national*.
numero] numero ‘in the light of’ may be used with or without in, cf. infra 73 in desertorum numero dicuntur.
decedunt] ‘move out of their way’: cf. the terms of the excommunication pronounced by Oedipus on the murderer of Laius, Oed. Tyr. 736,
rbv av8p arauSio rovrov oort* tort... firjr elo8txe(r&aL PLVT€ Trpootptoveiv rtvdt firjr iv 6eC)v	ftrjre	Ovfxaatv
Kotvbv TToietodaty firjre xtpVLPa* ^bfietvm udetv S’ dir oIkwv irdvrat, u>s fudeptarot rood’ rjfj.lv 6vros.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA32	DE	BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VI.
praeest unus] so the old Irish file were under the authority of a single head, called ollam or ollam a.
armis] Desjardins compares the strange custom by which the office of priest of Diana Nemorensis, whose shrine was near Aricia on the banks of the lacus Nemorensis, fell to the man who succeeded in killing the existing holder; the priest was consequently always armed, del TcepusKorCsv tAj indiaas, eroi/xor apvveadax. Strabo V. 3. 12.
24	in loco consecrato] said to be Durocasses (Dreux).
Chap. 14.
29 a bello abesse'] abesse is always used with ab in Caesar (Kraner). toto abessent bello in VII. 63 is probably no exception to this rule, see note.
p, 9, 1 ediscere] it need scarcely be said that before the introduction of writing and while that art was in its infancy the custom of learning by heart was practised to an extent almost inconceivable to the moderns who have little need or leisure to cultivate their powers of memory. With this passage cf. the geographer Mela, quoted by Desjardins, docent multa nobilissimos gentis clam et diut vicenis annis, aut in specu aut in abditis saltibus.
4 Graecis litteris utantur] it is not clear whether this means that they used the Greek language or simply the Greek characters: the balance of probability favours the latter; cf. I. 29, v. 48, where the same expression and the same difficulty occurs.
id] not the use of Greek letters, but the avoidance of committing their doctrines to writing.
quod...remittant] ‘which is the result in most cases, that persons relying on the aid of writing lose their perseverance in learning by heart as well as their retentiveness of memory’: for remittere cf. note on v. 49; cf. Plato, Phaedrus 275 A.
io	non interire animas] so Strabo says of them a<p6aprovs	Myovat kclI
ovToi kclI d\\oi tAs ^uxAs Kal tov koo/xov, iiriKpaTTjcreiv 51 irore Kal irvp koX v5wp. This last statement reminds one of the well-known theory of itcirupuois held by the Stoics who also contemplated the possibility of the destruction of the world by water, cf. Zeller Stoics p. 160 note 1. It would be interesting to know whence the Druids derived their doctrine of the transmigration of souls; Pythagoras is said to have introduced his tenet from Egypt.
mundi] ‘the universe’, in Greek icbapos; terrarum the world.
rerum natura] ‘nature’. The title of Lucretius’ great poem is de rerum natura ‘about nature’.
Chap. IB.
cum] ‘whenever’, used with the indicative; cf. iv. 33, v. 21, and infra 16, 17, 18, 19, 27: not elsewhere in Caesar; frequent in Cicero;
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIAinstances in Livy, 5 in Tacitus, never in Sallust, Velleius, Nepos or Florus: frequent in the poets. Draeger Hist. Synt. II. 528.
18 propulsarent] ‘ward off’, ‘repel’, almost equivalent to defendere, cf. Cic. off. ill. 74 is qui non defendit iniuriam neque propulsat and immediately after repellit iniuriam, cf. infra 23 bellum civitas aut illatum defendit aut infert.
ambactos] ‘retainers’: the word is of doubtful derivation, see Mommsen IV. 223 note, who remarks ‘according to all analogy the right to keep ambacti, that is, dovXoi fuadurrol, cannot have belonged to the Celtic nobility from the outset, but must only have developed itself gradually in antagonism to the older monarchy and to the equality of the free commons’. Orgetorix could summon on an emergency 10,000 followers, in addition, as it would seem, to omnes clientes obaeratosque suos, quorum magnum numerum habebat I. 4.
hanc...noverunt] ‘this is the only form of influence or power that they recognise’. Kraner refers to Tac. Germ. 13.
Chap. 16.
25 homines immolanf] the human sacrifices were in honour of the gods Teutates and Esus apparently equivalent to Mercury and Mars: cf. Lucan Phars. 1. 444 quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro | Teutates horrensque feris altaribus Esus.
simulacra] so Strabo IV. 4. KaTaoKevdoavres koXoooov x<>Prou Kal £v\wv, tufiaXovTes e/s tovtov (3ocncrjiiaTa kclI drjpia Tcavroia. kclI dvdpuirovs, wXokclvtow. The practice had apparently ceased in the time of Gaius Caesar in whose reign the geographer Pomponius Mela wrote; but it lingered in Britain, cf. Pliny xxx. 4. 1, who says hominem occidere religiosissimum erat mandi vero etiam saluberrimum. See Desjardins II. 523 foil-
quibus] the antecedent is simulacra not the nearer hominibus.
supplicia] Diodorus Sic. v. 32 says they kept malefactors for 5 years and then impaled them as an offering to the gods, dirooKoXoiri^ovoi rots dcoTs.
noxia] ‘offence’, the usual meaning of noxia, whereas noxa is rather the punishment for the offence. See the remark of Serv. Sulpicius Rufus quoted in Lewis and Short’s Lexicon s. v. noxia and Weissenborn on Livy II. 54.
p. 10. 3 descendunt] ‘have recourse to’.
Chap. 17.
Mercurium] supposed by some to be the Gallic Teutates.
7 Apollinem] probably Belen, as 23 votive monuments to Belenus have been found at Aquilee, on some of which the God is styled Belenus Apollo.
Martem] the Gallic divinity Esus is usually identified with Mars.
Digitized by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VI.
His name is found on a monument discovered in 17 n beneath the High Altar in Notre Dame. The figure is half-naked, armed with a hatchet and surrounded by forests. On the other side of the same monument is a figure with the form of a bull, surrounded by foliage, and bearing three cranes on its head and back. Beneath this are the words TARVOS TRIGARANVS. Desjardins II. 507.
Iovem] perhaps Taran the God of thunder, taran being Cornish, and tarrum Gaelic, for thunder: cf. Luc. Phars. I. 446 Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae. Desj. 1. c.
Minervam] M. Desjardins fails to discover any Gallic divinity corre
sponding to Minerva.
11 ceperint] ‘conj. perf. for conj. fut. exact, since devovent connotes a future signification \—se immolaturos voventy Kraner: ‘they promise to offer what they shall have taken in war ’.
Chap. 18.
Dite] it is not known what Gallic divinity Caesar here identifies with the Roman Dis.
ob eam causam] Dis or Pluto is the God of the nether regions, hence the God of darkness; and it is their worship of the god of darkness that in Caesar’s opinion causes them to reckon time by nights instead of days. There are traces of the same method of reckoning in English, as in the words ‘se’nnight*. ‘fortnight’. So Tacitus Germ, n says of the Germans nec dterum numerum ut nos sed noctium computant. Sic constituunt, sic condicunt, nox ducere diem videtur.
spatia omnis temporis] cf. the expression magnam partem omnis temporis in v. 7.
finiunt] ‘define’, so 25 non enim aliter finiri potest.
Chap 19.
28	dotis nomine] ‘in the way of dowry’. I imagine that the dowry would
not always consist solely of money, but partly of goods and chattels of the value of which a rough estimate would be made, and the husband would then contribute an equivalent in money or goods or both from his own possessions.
coniunctim] Cicero prefers the adverb coniuncte.
fructus] the interest or profits accruing from the capital.
uter] * whichever of the two’, i. e. husband or wrife, so cum means the survivor, whether husband or wife, the masc. gender being, according to the ordinary rule, preferred to the feminine.
utriusque] of the deceased, whether husband or wife.
vitae necisque potestatem] the same was the case originally at Rome, but there the husband had absolute power over the wife not as husband but as father. By marrying, the wife came under the patria potestas of her husband and wras regarded as a child of the family. In most primitive societies the pater familias had this unlimited power over every member of his household.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIACapp. 17—21]	NOTES.	35
p.ll. 3 de uxoribus] it is implied that the Gauls practised polygamy: Tacitus says of the Germans prope soli barbarorum singulis uxoribus contenti sunt.
in servilem modum] 'after the manner of dealing with slaves'. With the form of expression cf. humanam vicem in Horace’s lines (Epod. v. 87) venena magnum fas nefasque non valent | convertere humanam vicem where the meaning seems to be 'poisons cannot destroy the great principles of right and wrong as they can men ’.
pro cultu Gallorum\ 'considering the state of Gallic civilisation’.
cordi fuisse] cordi is probably an old locative and not a true predicative dative, a usage which is almost confined to abstract nouns: cf. Roby 11. preface.
supra hanc memoriam] 'before our time*
iustis] ‘complete’.
Chap. 20.
rem publicam] ‘public affairs'.
habent sanctum] the use of habeo with the passive participle denotes the abiding result of the action of the verb: ‘they have (it) enacted’: contrast equitatum coegerat ‘he had collected the cavalry ’ with equitatum coactum habebat ‘he had the cavalry collected’. This form is of course the origin of the modem French perfect; t.g.fai fait—habeo factum.
rumore autfamd\ cf. VII. 8 fama ac nuntii {nuntiis?); infra 30 fama ac nuntius.
14	temerarios] cf. VII. 42 temeritas quae maxime illi hominum generi
est innata ut levem auditionem habeant pro re comperta. Caesar often alludes to the rash and impulsive character of the Gauls.
18 per concilium] ‘on the occasion of a council’.
Chap. 21.
20 neque druidcs...student] the Germans had priests, as we know from Tacitus, though no Druids ; and they did sacrifice to their gods, though Caesar may be right in saying that they did not pay much heed (student) to such things. The Gothic name for priest was gudja. On the subject of the German sacrifices and priesthood cf. Grimm Deutsche Mythologie I. c. 3 and 5 (4th ed. E. H. Meyer): this work has been translated into English by J. S. Stallybrass.
cemunt] Caesar’s statement must be accepted with reserve. The
German worship was by no means of an elemental character.
Solem...acceperunt) oi. Tac. Germ. 9. Tacitus and Caesar are here at direct issue and credence must be given by preference to Tacitus. In 17 Caesar says of the Gauls deum maxime Mercurium colunt. Tacitus uses the very same words of the Germans, nor, as Orelli points out, can his employment of Caesar’s actual words be attributed to chance; it rather marks an intentional contradiction. Mercurius must be identified with
Digitized by GOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VI.
Wodan, Wodan sane, quem adieeta littera Gwodan dixerunt, ipse est, qui apud Romanos Mercurius dicitur, et ab universis gentibus ut deus adoratur. Paulus Diae. qu. by Orelli. Schweizer-Sidler suggests that the similarity of the two names Teutates and Vodamus may have facilitated the identification of Wodan and Mercury. Mars (another German divinity acc. to Tacitus) is identified with Tyr or Ziu and among some German tribes with Er. Ziu is probably Dyaus the Greek Zeus, and therefore Caesar may be thinking of this God when he says that they worshipped the Sun. Tacitus also says that they worshipped Hercules, and that some of the Suebi even acknowledged the divinity of Isis.
studiis rei militarist ‘military pursuits’.
ab parvulis] ‘from childhood’, cf. the Greek Ik ttcUSup. In IV. 1 Caesar writes a pueris.
impuberes\ ‘chaste’: impuber here =feminae notitia carens. Tacitus Germ. 20 agrees herewith, sera iuvenum venus eoque inexhausta pubertas.
rhenonum tegumentis] ‘coverings of reindeer skins’: cf. Sail. Hist. Fragm. Germani intectum rhenonibus corpus legunt [habenti). Cf. B. G. lv. 1, Tac. Germ. 17.
Chap. 22.
agriculturae non student] so Tacitus says, (Germ. 13) delegata domus et penatium et agrorum cura feminis senibusque et infirmissimo cuique ex familia.
victus] Tac. Germ. 23 cibi simplices, agrestia poma, recens fera aut lac concretum; sine apparatu sine blandimaitis expellunt famem. A favourite article of food was puls ex avena facta. Cf. B. G. IV. 1 Tteque multum frumento sed maximam partem lacte atque pecore vivunt, mul- iumque sunt in venationibus.
p. 12.	2	gentibus	cognationibusque']	cognatio	is	‘blood-relationship’, i. e.
relationship existing between persons descended from a common pair of ancestors. It is now generally allowed that the family, a small group of persons bound together by the ties of consanguinity, formed the unit and starting-point of ancient communities. ‘The elementary group is the Family, connected by common subjection to the highest male ascendant. The aggregation of Families forms the Gens or House. The aggregation of Houses makes the Tribe. The aggregation of Tribes constitutes the commonwealth.* Sir H. Maine, Ancient Law, c. 5 (Primitive Society and Ancient-Law), p. 128. These Teutonic gentes then were groups of families regarding themselves as sprung from common ancestors and owning allegiance to the highest living male ascendant. The same author shows how persons of alien descent were constantly being incorporated into these groups by the process of Legal Fictions; Anc. Law, p. I2p foil.; Early History of Institutions, Sect. 3 (kinship as the basis of society).
quantum] to be taken with agri.
anno post] ‘the year after compel them to move elsewhere’. Cf. Tac.
GoogleNOTES.
Germ. 26 arva (arable land) per annos mutant et superest ager. So Caesar says of the Suebi iv. 1, privati ac separati agri apud eos nihil est neque longius anno remanere uno in loco incolendi causa licet. Cf. what Horaee says of the Getae Od. III. 24. 14 nec cultura placet longior annua.
ut animi] ‘that they may keep the people in check by contentment of mind’. Kraner aptly compares Com. Nepos, Thras. iv. 2 nolo amplius quam centum iugera quae meam animi aequitatem...significent.
cum quisque videat] ‘each one seeing*.
atm potentissimis]=cum pot entis simorum opibus. This shortened form of comparison is common both in Latin and Greek. A good example is afforded by Iuv. ill. 73 sermo promptus et Isaeo torrentior= Isaei sermone ‘than that of Isaeus’: Horn. II. XVII. 51 k6/mcu xaP^T€(rffltf ojjidiai ‘locks like to those of the Charites’.
Chap. 23.
12 civitatibus...haberes] so in iv. 3 speaking of the Suebi Caesar says publice maximam putant esse laudem quam latissime a suis finibus vacare agros: hac re significari magnum numerum civitatum suam vim sustinere non posse, itaque una ex parte a Suebis circiter milia passum DC agri vacare dicuntur. These figures must however be received with caution.
hoc proprium] ‘they think this a distinguishing mark of valour, that their neighbours shall be expelled from their domains and retire before them, and that no one should venture to settle near them *.
aut in latum defendit aut inferf\ cf. 15 iniurias inf errent aut inlatas propulsarent.
ut habeant] ‘to the extent of having*. Yet Tacitus says, Germ. 7, ceterum neque animadvertere neque vincire ne verberare quidem nisi sacerdotibus permissum. Caesar may be confusing the magistratus with the sacerdotes.
21	regionum] regiones ‘districts*, a word of quite indefinite meaning. It
is supposed by some that the German pagus (‘canton’) consisted of 1000 households. Schweizet-Sidler on Tac. Germ. 6: cf. Germ. 12 eliguntur in iisdem conciliis et principes qui iura per pagos vicosque reddunt. With regard to the vicus Sir H. Maine says “The township was an organised, self-acting group of Teutonic families, exercising a common proprietorship over a definite tract of land, its Mark, cultivating its domain on a common system, and sustaining itself by the produce. It is described by Tacitus in the ‘Germany* as the vicus; it is well known to have been the proprietary and even the political unit of the earliest English society; it is allowed to have existed among the Scandinavian races, and it survived to so late a date in the Orkney and Shetland Islands as to have attracted the personal notice of Walter Scott”. Village Communities, lect. 1. p. 10.
controversias minuunt] cf. V. 26 quibus rebus controversias minui posse sperarent.
2	habent] 4 involve *, 4 bring with them *.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA38	DE	BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VI.
qui sequi velint profiteantur] ‘and that those who wish to follow him should say so ’.
28 tx his] of those who have promised their aid.
31 ab iniuria prohibetU] the abl. without ab is often used with prohibere•
Chap. 24.
p. 13. I GaU{] Tac. Germ. 28 validiores olim Gallorum res fuisse summus auctor divus Julius tradit; coque credibile est etiam Gallos in Germaniam transgressos.
Hercyniam silvam] the exact limits of this forest can hardly be determined. Goler (Ed. 2, pp. 36, 37) says, ‘it consisted undoubtedly of the Thuringerwald, the Franconian ranges, the Fichtelgebirge, Erzgebirge, Riesengebirge, the Sudeten Mountains and the Great Carpathians ’. See below, 25.
Eratostheni] ‘bom at Cyrene 272 B.C., died 192 B.c. at Alexandria, distinguished in many branches of knowledge, especially astronomy, mathematics and geography’ (Kraner). ‘The founder of scientific chronology’ (Jebb).
quibusdam Graecis] Schneider suggests that one of these Greek authors may be Timotheus who is associated with Eratosthenes in a passage of Strabo, p. 249.
Orcyniam] Schneider qu. \L\jybv ’0pKvvaiov from the Anthologia Palatina and from Ptolemaeus. But the form 'EpKbvtos is found in Strabo, Diodorus, Dionysius Halicarnassus, Dionysius Periegetes, Stephanus, Eustathius, and possibly in Aristotle who also has ’ApKvvia 6py.
Volcae Tectosages] this tribe migrated from the Provincia Narbonensis and occupied the present Bohemia. Narbo, Tolosa and Carcaso were among their towns. Strange stories are told of their wealth and of the numerous lakes, now dried up, in which they hid their treasures: cf. Strabo, pp. 187-189. The aurum Tolosatum is mentioned by Cicero, N. D. in. 30.
nunc quod...comparant-] on the reading of this passage see appendix. The general sense seems to be:—‘At the present day, since the uermans live the same hard life as they used to live, while the Gauls have been enervated by the luxury of the neighbouring provinces, they (the Gauls) have learnt by the experience of several battles to consider themselves no longer a match for the Germans’. Thus the protasis of the sentence ends at largitur, and the apodosis begins at paulalim.
inopia, egestate] ‘poverty, want’.
11 provinciarum] the two Gallic provinces, transalpitia and cisalpina. I prefer this, the view of Kraner, to that of Schneider who supposes Caesar to mean the provinces of Narbonensis, Spain, Sicily and Sardinia.
Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIANOTES.
Chap. 26.
novem dierum tier] one may consider this to represent roughly a distance of from 200 to 350 miles.
latitudo] Caesar reckons its breadth from north to south. We may assume, without any attempt to speak precisely, that it extended from the lake of Constance northwards to Marburg and the source of the Weser. This would fairly represent the distance indicated by Caesar when he says that it started from the boundaries of the Nemetes, Raurici and Helvetii. The Nemetes dwelt on the left bank of the Rhine in the neighbourhood of Spires. The colonia Rauricorum was at or near Augst on the left bank of the Rhine east of Basle. The Helvetii occupied most of the modem Switzerland-
recta Danubii regione] * following the line of the Danube*.
Dacorum et Anartium] Daci, the inhabitants of Dacia, a large district north of the Danube corresponding roughly to Roumania and a part of Austria. One of their kings named Cotiso was an ally of Antony in 31 B.C., cf. Hor. Od. III. 8. 18 occidit Daci Cotisonis agmen. Dacia was constituted a Roman province by Trajan about 107 A.D. The Anartes seem to have occupied a part of N. Hungary between the Danube and the Theiss.
70 sinistrorsus] * leftwards *f i.e. north-eastwards toward the Carpathians.
33 initium] its eastward limit. From the bend of the Rhine at Basle to the junction of the Theiss and the Danube is a little over 600 miles.
25 quae non sint] ‘such as are not*: quae non sunt would mean 'which as a fact are not*: compare the following quae differant.
Chap. 26.
27 est bos cervi figura] the reindeer, rangifer tarandus. With respect to Caesar’s use of the word bos I quote the following from a paper on the Zoology of Ancient Europe read by Prof. Newton before the Cambridge Philosophical Society in 1862: “Caesar begins his notice of this animal in the words est bos cervi figura% and it is remarkable that in Sweden and Norway, where it yet flourishes, the terms bull, cow, and ox, are at the present day always applied to the Rein-Deer, instead of hart or hind, buck or doe. So also in the fur countries of North America, where a form perhaps not to be distinguished from the European species occurs, the same peculiarity obtains, since it is known as the Carriboo or Carr^-bceuf, a corruption of Cerf-bceuf or ‘stag-ox*.” When the Romans made their first acquaintance with elephants in Lucania they called them Lucae boves. For the substance of most of the notes on this and the two following chapters, I am indebted to Prof. Newton. In prehistoric times the reindeer was found over a great part of Europe, and in the south of France was so abundant that the age in which it flourished is known among palaeontologists as the Reindeer Period. See Christy and Lartet’s Reliquiae Aquitanicae, Essay II. pp.
by Google[COMM. VI.
25, 26, in which work are numerous plates representing weapons or implements made of its antlers, these often bearing incised figures of this and other contemporary animals. In historic times there is no evidence, other than Caesar’s, of its existence in Europe south of the Baltic, except a passage of doubtful meaning in the Orkneyinga Saga which may signify its occurrence in the 12th century in Caithness. See Alston’s Fauna of Scotland, Mammalia, p. 36.
unum cornu] Prof. Boyd Dawkins (‘The former range of the Reindeer in Europe’, Popular Science Review, vii. pp. 40, 41) says: ‘This description has been considered by many as of no value at all and as a pure invention of Caesar’s brain. It seems to me, however, a very natural explanation of the difficulties of the passage, if we suppose that Caesar described the animal partly from hearsay and partly from a rude sketch in profile. In the latter case, unless the drawing were in correct perspective the animal would appear to be possessed of one horn only, and therefore he might legitimately describe it in times when a belief in all kinds of monsters was current, as possessed of one horn*. Prof. Newton suggests that Caesar had seen a reindeer’s horns of a not unusual type, having the brow antler on one side extending straight down the middle of the forehead and developed at the expense of the other, which is thus often reduced to a single tine, and that he intended to describe this remarkable appearance. But in that case would not Caesar have written excelsius altero or something similar? I fear Caesar cannot be acquitted of the charge of having described the Reindeer as a ‘Unicorn’.
palmae ratnique] Caesar evidently compares the palmated extremity of reindeers’ horns to the palm of the hand. Such a comparison would suggest itself to any one who had ever seen them. Nilsson, Skandi- navisk Fauna, Daggdjuren, p. 502, calls them ‘flathandslika*, i.e. like the palm of the hand, so most other descriptive zoologists in terms almost similar. These ‘palms’ end in finger-like prolongations, the rami of Caesar, and ‘tines* (A. S. tan = twig) in the technical language of those who have to do with deer. Cf. Pliny XI. 37. 45 sparsit {natura cornua)
in ramos, ut cervorum		aliorum fudit in palmas, digitosque emisit ex
hist unde platycerotas vocant.
natura] ‘general characteristics’.
eadem...cornuum] this is only partly correct: the horns of the female are of the same form as those of the male, but considerably less in magnitude. The Reindeer is the only European species of which the female has horns.
Chap. 27.
alces] alces is a latinised form of the Teutonic Elg, Elch, or Elk. The animal is now hardly met with in Germany unless it be in the parts bordering on Poland.
consimilis capris] Caesar means caprorum figurae: this shortened form of comparison has been already noticed in 22 cum suas quisque opes cum potentis simis ( =potentis simorum opibus) aequari videat: cf.Capp. 26—28]
below 18 amplitudo...differt» The rectangular abruptness which characterises the hind'quarters of a goat is equally observable in the Elk, and warrants the conclusion that Caesar had seen a living example of the latter. If so it was doubtless young, as Elks are not easily kept in confinement for any length of time, and this would also explain his subsequent statement magnitudine paulo antecedunt as well as mutilae sunt comibus, for young elks bear no horns, though the adult male has them of considerable size, varietas pellium is justified by the whiteness of the tail beneath and of the inside of the legs,
p. 14. i crura] here Caesar is obviously relating only what he had heard, ^nd those who know the marvellous misconceptions as to this animal to which mediaeval writers give currency will not be surprised at what he says. It is possible that the natives may have been in the habit of digging pitfalls for the animal and covering them over with timber partly cut through so as readily to give way beneath its weight; thus one could to a certain degree understand the possibility of the erroneous notion arising that the capture of the Elk was effected by weakening the supports against which it rested. A precisely similar belief, apparently originating with Ktesias of Knidos (nor. 400 6.c.), long prevailed with respect to the Elephant. The error is learnedly discussed by Sir Thomas Browne in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica or Enquiries into vulgar and common Errors, Bk. in. c. 1, ‘That an elephant hath no joints, &c.’
adjlictae]	4 overthrown ’, so below infirmas arbores adfiigunt.
erigere sese aut sublevare] there is little or no difference between the two verbs: cf. Liv. XXI. 58 cum se quisque extollere ac levare vellet, Cic.
Fin. V. 39 ars agricolarum quae (arbores) circumcidat, amputet, erigat, extollat, adminiculet. Numerous examples of this use of synonyms in Nagelsbach Lat. Stil. § 81.
paulum modo reclinatae] ‘slightly reclining’, L e. they almost stood erect.
tantum ut summa...relinquatur) ‘only allowing them to retain the general appearance of standing upright *.
consuetudine] an adverbial ablative like ratione, iure, natura etc.: sua is sometimes added as in 11. 19 etc.; in other passages as in 1. 53 etc. ex consuetudine sua is found.
Chap. 28.
urt] urus is the latinised form of the Teutonic Urochs or Auerochs, though the latter name since the extinction of its proper owner has been by many writers transferred to the Bison. The urus has long ceased to exist in Europe, unless it survives in the degenerate form of the so-called ‘wild cattle’ retained in certain English and Scottish parks (Chartley, Chillingham, and Hamilton). See Storer’s ‘Wild white cattle of Britain . Its remains are found abundantly in many of the drift deposits both in England and on the continent, and were first scientifically described under the name of Bos Primigenius. They are mostly more or less fragmentary, but nearly perfect skeletons exist in the Museums of Jena, Lund and Cambridge. There is little doubt that the Wild Bull
P. C. vi.	4
Original from NIVERSITY OF VIRGINIADE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VI.
and Unicom (reSm) of the Authorised Version of the Bible refer to the same animal, which is represented in several of the Assyrian sculptures as being hunted and slain, and it has been suggested that the legend of the famous Dun Cow may have originated at a time, long before the days of Guy of Warwick, when the first settlers in Britain had to encounter the formidable urus.
durant se] ‘harden themselves', ‘make themselves hardy*: the word is rare in this sense.
ne parvuli quidem excepti] ‘not even when caught very young*.
a nostrorum boum cornibus] for the brevity of expression cf. supra
22, 27.
a comibus differ/] some of the best MSS omit a, wrongly, differre with the dative being found only in poetry and post-Augustan prose, cf. Madvig on Cic. Fin. v. 41.
ab labris] a good example of the use of ab almost in the sense of ‘at*, i. e. ‘in the direction of*, an extension of its original meaning of motion from a place : cf. such common phrases as a dextra ‘on the right’, i. e. ‘starting from the right hand’, ‘in the direction of the right hand*: so Cic. Verr. v. 13 ne denudetur a pectore: see Driiger Hist. Synt. II. 621. ‘They surround them on the brim (lips) with silver*, labra being the circular rim of the base of the hollowed horn. Pliny mentions these hom cups, urorum comibus barbari septentrionales potant, umisque bina capitis unius cornua implent H. N. II. 37. 45. The Germans drank beer, umor ex hordeo aut frumento in quandam similitudinem vini corruptus, and sometimes wine, Tac Germ. «3. They were greatly addicted to'drunkenness.
Chap. 29.
25 Ubios] here used as an adjective.
minime] to be taken with student,	‘pay very little heed to*.
auxilia\ the reinforcements that they were in the habit of sending into Gaul.
in extremo ponte] at the broken end of the bridge. The cohorts were probably stationed on the left bank, unless, as Goler supposes, the bridge had been constructed near Kesselheim (cf. n. on 9), in which case the cohorts may have been posted on the island Niederwerth.
p 15. 4 Ambiorigis] who, it will be remembered, was king of the Eburones.
5 Arduennam silvam] the length of more than 500 miles which Caesar assigns to this forest is of course, as Mr Long says, a monstrous exaggeration. Strabo, p. 194, speaks of the forest as TroWrj fj.lv ov Tooavrr] 81 8<ttjv ol ovyypa<p€ts dprfKaxn, TerpaKioxCkLuv oraSLojv, where he is doubtless alluding to Caesar. Goler proposes to read centum et quinquaginta which would about represent the actual limits, but the mss agree in quingentis.
qua] nom. fern. sing, agreeing with significatio.
itizedby GOOglCNOTES.
Chap. 30.
quo in loco\ — in turn locum in quo.
sicut magno accidit casu] *as it happened by a great chance*: the words magno casu occur again in B. C. in. 14 it a exiguo tempore magno- que casu totius exercitus salus constitit. Cf. below, magnae fortunae, and 35 quantos fortuna adferat casus, 42 ne minimo quidem casu.
priusque] ‘and that his arrival was seen by the men (Ambiorix and his party) before any report or message of it was brought’. Forfama ac nuntii cf. VII. 8 celeriter haec fama ac nuntii ad Vercingetorigem perferuntur where however the reading is doubtful.
sic magnae'] ‘so it was a striking instance of fortune (chance) that though bereft of all the military stores that he had with him, his horses and wagons having been seized, he should nevertheless himself escape death*.
22 sed hoc quoque factum est quod...] lit. ‘but it occurred also from the fact that*. Kraner points out that hoc is abl. and quod refers to it, ‘through this fact, namely that* etc.: if hoc were nom. and quodvrzrt ‘ because *, quoque would have no sense.
25 silvarum atque fluminum] so Tacitus says of the Germans (Germ. 16) colunt discreti ac diversi, ut fonst ut campus, ut nemus placuit;...suam quisque domum spatio circumdat.
Chap. 31,
indicio] ‘deliberately*.
tempore exclusus] Cf. v. 23 ne anni tempore a navigatione excluderetur.
cum crederet] ‘believing’: contrast this with quodexistimarii above, where the perf. subj. represents the perf. ind. in direct statement.
p. 16.	2	paludes]	probably the marshy levels skirting the course of the
Rhine: continentes = continuas ‘continuous*.
3 insulis] the numerous islands in the estuaries of the Rhine and the
omnibus precibus detestatus] ‘after invoking the bitterest imprecations on Ambiorix*.
qui fuisset] ‘for having been’.
taxo] ‘yew*; for its deadly properties see Pliny XVI. 10. 20. In Arcadia it was supposed to be fatal to those who slept or took food beneath its shade.
Chap. 32,
Segni] the Segni occupied a small district in the present Rhine province between Bonn and Aix-la-Chapelle. Their name remains in the town of S£gne south of Givet. Desjardins places them lower in a valley of the upper Ourthe called the Oessenine.DE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VI.
Condrusi] the Condrusi, who were clientes of the Treveri, occupied the right bank of the Meuse and both banks of the Ourthe and were situated south of Aix-la-Chapelle. Their name survives in Condroz a district on the right bank of the Meuse.
qui] the antecedent is I think Segni Condrusique not Germanorum as Kraner takes it.
si it a fecissent] ‘if they should do so*.
io Aduatucam] Cohausen and Kampen suppose that this place is to be sought at or near Embourg a small village on the right bank of the Ourthe about 2 miles S.S.E. of Luttich a town close to the junction of the Ourthe and the Meuse. Kampen distinguishes between Aduatuca (Embourg) and the oppidum Aduatucorum of II. 29 which he places with Goler and others on M. Falhize near Huy. See my note on that passage. By others Aduatuca is thought to be Tongres.
in mediis Eburonum finibus] this expression, as Kampen confesses, scarcely suits his supposition that Aduatuca was at Embourg. He suggests that the name of some other tribe (in the gen. case) may have dropped out after Eburonum.
Titurius atque Aurunculetus] cf. V. 24.
reliquis rebus] ‘on other accounts’.
25	ut...sublevaret] these words follow logically after probarat ‘he had
approved of’ (almost =‘he had chosen’) ‘this place, in order to lighten the labour of the soldiers ’.
proxume conscriptas] cf. supra 1.
Chap. 83.
30 ad Oceanum versus] for ad or in with versus cf. note on vn. 8.
32 ad eam regionem] probably the district between the Meuse and the Demer, corresponding roughly to the Belgian province of Limburg. Napoleon and Goler.
p. 17.	1	Scaldem]	the	Scheldt,	whose	eastern	arm,	Easter Schelde,
appears in Caesars time to have joined the Meuse. There is no need to suppose with Goler that Caesar wrote Sabrimy the Sambre.
2 extremas Arduennae partes] between Brussels and Antwerp. Napoleon.
post diem septimum ...quam ad diem] for the change of gender cf. I. 6 diem dicunt qua die...conveniant: is dies erat a. d. V. Kal. Apr.: below however 35 Caesar writes dies appetebat septimus quem ad diem.
possent] horiatur is an historical present and there is therefore no incorrectness in the use of the past tense possent in the final clause. The present is retained above in the conditional clause si...possint.
Chap. 84.
certa] ‘definite’ (Kraner): this seems better than to understand the word as meaning ‘trusty’, as Schneider and Long do.Capp. 32—36]	NOTES.	45
14	vicinitatibus] ‘the neighbours*, abstract for concrete : so we use the
singular ‘neighbourhood’ in the concrete sense of ‘neighbours*.
non in summa]* not in protecting the army as a whole*. Kraner qu. B. C. I. 67 etsi aliquo accepto detrimento tamen summa exercitus salva,
18	ex parte] ‘to a certain extent*.
70	silvae] ‘the woods by reason of their uncertain and hidden pathways
prevented them from approaching in a body*.
72 stirpem] ‘the whole stock*, cf. below stirps ac nomen civitatis: Liv. XXXiv. 7 omne genus ab stirpe sublatum eslt xxxvil. 8 exoleta stirpe gentis,
27 ut...prmndebatur] ‘precautionary measures were taken as far as care could ensure them amid difficulties of such a character*. Foe ut cf. Cic. Fam. xii. 2 non nihil, ut in tantis malis, est profectum, ‘considering the extent of the troubles*.
Chap. 35.
p. 18. 7 fortuna] Caesar had expressed the same sentiment before in 30.
dirip 1] present tense ‘were being plundered*.
ultro] the force of this word can best be expressed here by a paraphrase : ‘and that Caesar was going so far as to call out all the neighbouring tribes to the spoil ’.
Sugambri] they occupied the right bank of the Rhine between the Sieg and the Lippe.
Tencteros atque Usipetes] these two tribes are generally mentioned together. They dwelt on the right bank of the Rhine north of the Lippe : cf. iv. 4. For their reception by the Sugambri see IV. 16.
xxx mil, pass.] supposing Goler to be right in the locality assigned by him for Caesar’s second bridge (infra 9), viz. the village of Kessel- heim just below Coblenz, the Germans must have crossed near Bonn.
ex fuga dispersos] ‘dispersed in flight *, lit. ‘after*, or * in consequence of, their flight *: cf. above receptos ex fuga.
fortunatissimis] on the whole the dative has better MS authority than fortunatissimos which would of course be equally correct, though the accusative is rare; cf. Dr Reid’s note on Cic. p. Corn. Balbo § 79.
77	ut...possit] ‘that it is not sufficient even to surround the wall*, i. e.
the garrison is so small that it would scarcely suffice to man the whole circle of the wall
Chap. 36.
praeceptis Caesaris] ‘according to Caesar’s precepts.’
ne calonem quidem quemquam] ‘not even a single camp-follower*. The calones were the soldiers’ servants, see S. D. A. s. v.
p. 19. r diffidens] ‘not feeling confident that Caesar would keep his promise about the number of days*.
illius] Cicero’s.
nullum...posset] ‘expecting no such mischance that any harm should
t zed by GoogleDE BELLO GALLICO. [Comm. VI.
befall {quo offendi posset) within the short space of three miles in the face of {oppositis) nine legions and a large body of cavalry, when the enemy were dispersed and almost annihilated*. Offendi is impersonal as in B. C. III. 72 qu. by Kraner.
collis] a short distance from the junction of the Ourthe and the Meuse near Luttich the small river Vesdre flows into the Ourthe. At first the course of the two rivers diverges rapidly, each curving outwards, but soon they trend towards each other again and approach to within a mile or so. In the half-enclosed circular space thus formed lies the little village of Embourg where Kampen supposes that Cicero was encamped; just below it and between the two elbows of the rivers is some rising ground which may be the hill here mentioned; over it on the side away from Embourg is some level ground where the troops may have gone foraging.
hoc spatio dierum] L e. within the seven days since the legions left.
sub vexillo\ ‘they formed a special detachment with a vexillum, which must be distinguished from the regular colours (signa) of the legion.* (Kraner.)
14	facta potestate] ‘permission having been granted*.
Chap. 37.
14 hoc ipso tempore et casu] ‘just at this critical moment*.
adpropinquarent] one would rather have expected appropinquabant here and poterat for posset in the similar passage III. 23, prius in castris constiterunt quam plane ab his videri..posset^ since Caesar is apparently merely stating the sequence of the two events. But the subjunctive may obscurely imply the intention of the barbarians not to be seen before they approached the camp. For the distinction of moods after priusquam, cf. Reid on Cic. p. Corn. Balb. § 18.
mercatores'] the Roman armies were usually followed by itinerant traders called lixae ‘sutlers’; cf. B. Afr. 75 lixarum mercatorumque qui plostris merces portabant interceptis sarcinis.
recipiendi sui] cf. n. on v. 38, III. 4.
21 circumfunduntur] ‘ the enemy pour around on the remaining sides (of the camp) to see if they can (lit. ‘could’) find any entrance’. Beware of translating circumfunduntur ‘are surrounded’.
«3 reliquos aditus] ‘other means of approach* (except by the gates): defendit ‘ prevents *.
plerique novas] ‘many draw novel superstitions from the locality*.
qui...castello] ‘reflecting that they fell in the same fort*, occiderint, representing the perfect indicative in direct discourse. Caesar is representing the thoughts or expressions of the Roman soldiers and hence uses the subjunctive.
Chap. 38. p. 20. 3 Baculus] cf. II. 25, ill. 5.
primum pilum duxerat] ‘had commanded the first pilus \ i. e. the first maniple of the triarii. The centurion in command of the primus pilus is himself called primus pilus or primipilus as Baculus is in II. 25.
Digitized by GOOgkrelinquit animus Sextium] ‘ Sextius faints'.
per manus tractus] ‘dragged from hand to hand'; cf. vii. 25 per manus traditas glebas^ 47 mulieres per manus demissae.
speciem defensorum praebeant] cf. III. 25 cum speciem atque opinionem pugnantium praeberent.
Chap. 89.
exaudiunt] * catch the sound of. exaudire is to catch a sound coming from any quarter. This is, I believe, a more correct explanation than that usually given, that the word means ‘to hear clearly': cf. v. 30 et id clariore voce ut magna pars militum exaudiret where the meaning is ‘that his words might reach them'. Cic. Acad. II. 20 quam multa quae nos fugiunt in cantu exaudiunt in eo genere exercitati’, ‘catch’.
quid...expectanf\ ‘they wait to see what orders they (the officers) give’.
rei novitate perturbetur] in 37 re nova perturbantur.
Chap. 40.
tumulumJ probably the collis mentioned in 36.
in signa manipulosque'] each maniple had its own standard, cf. 34 si continere ad signa manipulos vellet.
ut perrumpant] this depends on cement.
sint] subjunctive because the clause is subordinate, cf. supra I quoniam ipse remaneret.
at] ‘yet at least’: certe is often appended to at in this sense.
C. Trebonio] not the C. Trebonius mentioned in 33 and 34.
p- 21. 4 etiam nunc] ‘even then’, ‘even after that'. Caesar writing vividly, as though the event were going on before his eyes, uses nunc where turn would have been more natural.
9 ex inferioribus ordinibus] it will be remembered that the legion under Cicero had been newly levied, hence Caesar had drafted into it some centurions of the inferior centuries (ordines) of his trained legions: of the 60 centurions of each legion, 30 were styled priores and 30 posteriores.
pars...perit) two of the five cohorts were destroyed, cf. 44.
Chap. 41.
in silvis) cf. 35 end, quam nancti erasit praedam in occulto relinquunt.
19	Volusenus] called in III. 5 vir et consilii magni et virtutis.
alienata mente] this passage has apparently been overlooked by Forcellini and by Lewis and Short in their account of the phrase. It occurs in Livy, Suetonius, Pliny, etc.
neque...contenderent] ‘and maintained that had the army been safe the Germans would not have attacked the camp ’: et contenderent Ger- manos non fuisse etc.
Digitized by GOOglCDE BELLO GALLICO.	[Comm. VI.
Chap. 42.
eventus] acc. pl., 4not unaware of the issues (chances) of war*.
unum] to be taken with questus, ‘only making one complaint*. Caesar emphasizes his forbearance, for it is evident that Cicero had shown great lack of presence of mind during the surprise as well as of prudence before it.
ne...debuisse} parenthetical: (asserting) ‘that opportunity ought not to have been left for the very slightest contingency (risk) *. casu dative, for casui, locum relinquere 4 to leave room for* occurs in v. 52.
multum fortunam] Caesar seems to have been much impressed just at this period by the influence of fortune in human affairs, cf. supra 30, 35*
iudicavit] ‘ came to the conclusion ’. amplius] sc. fortunam potuisse.
avertisset] the subject is fortuna.
p. 22« i beneficium] by inflicting loss on the Romans.
Chap. 48.
antti tempore] probably the late autumn.
in praesentia] praesentia is the acc. pl. of praesens.
locum] not used here of an actual locality but of a ‘situation* of events: ‘they often arrived at the situation*.
ut modo] ‘that the captives were looking about for Ambiorix whom they had just seen in his flight*.
nee plane] ‘and maintaining that he had scarcely vanished from their sight’: nec only qualifies plane, cf. supra 41.
qui putarent] ‘inasmuch as they thought*.
paene naturam] ‘exerted themselves to an almost superhuman degree*.
18 latebris aut saltibus] instrumental ablatives, ‘by means of hiding- places or thick woods’.
Chap. 44.
23 Durocortorum] Rheims.
in Lingonibus] probably at Andematunnum afterwards called Lingones now Langres, the chief town in the district occupied by the Lingones.
Agedinci’] Sens.
ut instituerat] ‘as his practice was*: this has reference to the following words in IiaJiarn, etc.