13	1	• Gallia est omuls, Caesar refers to that part of Ganl which had
not yet been subdued by the Romans. The southern part of the country had become a Roman province as early as the year B. C. 120, and' is usually designated by Caesar as provincia, or provincia nostra. Hence, in the division here given, the Allobroges, the province in Transalpine Gaul, and Cisalpine Gaul are not included, though they were usually comprehended in the general term Gallia.—Partes tres. Oudendorp, in his edition, gives partes tris, from the ancient MSS. For this form of the accus. from adjectives and nouns making turn in the gen. pi, see Z. § 68 and Note; A. and S. § 85, Exc. 1, and § 114, Note.
2m Belgae. These, in the time of Caesar, were divided into sixteen tribes, (populi.) They were of German origin, and the most warlike of the Gauls. See Anthon’s Class. Dicty. p. 538.—Aliam, used here in the sense of alteram.—Qui ipsorum, etc. Construe, (ii) qui ipsorum lingua appellantur Celtae, nostra (lingua) Galli, (incolunt) tertiam (partem.) See A. and S. § 206, (3.)
Celtae. This term, among ancient authors, comprised Spain, Gaul, and other nations. More rarely it signified Gaul only, and the whole of Gaul. Consult Anthon’s Class. Dicty. p. 537; Michelet’s History of France, Bk. I. chap. 1.
Differunt. The difference does not seem to have been material.
4, 3. Garumna	Matrona et Sequana. The modem names
are the Garonne, Marnef and Seine. Garumna is nomin. to dividit, which governs Gallos in the accus. Matrona et Sequana have dividunt Gallos understood.
6. Cultu .... humanitate. The former refers to the care given in providing the comforts and elegancies of life; the latter to the intellectual cultivation and refinement resulting from the study of the best writers. See Ramsh. 297, 643. Consult Justin, xliii. 4.
T • Provinciae, i. e. the Roman province in Transalpine Gaul. The * vicinity of Marseilles (a Greek colony) had no doubt a humanizing and polishing effect upon the neighboring inhabitants.—Minime saepe, “ least often,” i. e. very seldom.
IO.	Bellum gerunt. See Ramsh. 145.
12m Proeliis. This word refers to the battle generally, the animated
Digitized by Google175
p«*t
contest of the many, including the evolutions and manoeuvres practised jg by each party. Bellum and proelium are sometimes used indiscriminately. See Crombie, p. 85; Ramsh. 145, 838.
Eos, L e. Germanos.—Prohibenti with the ablat See Z. $468.
 Eorum. The reference is to hi omnes preceding, i. e. the Belgae, Aquitani, and Galli. Many supply finium Oalliae. Schmitz says, “ eorum is here used with a colloquial carelessness, instead of una pars earum trium partium”
Continetur, “ is bounded.”
Attingit.... ab, “ it extends .... on the side of/* Ac.
4« Extremis finibus. Spoken with reference to Rome, meaning the part most distant from Italy, or the northern boundary of Gallia Propria, inhabited by the Celtae or Galli.
T. Earn partem Oceani, i. e., the southern shore of the bay of Biscay, which washes the northern coast of Spain
8. Ad, “ at, or next to.”
Cose. = consulibus, abl. absol. The date was B. C. 61, i. e. three yean before Caesar’s.arrival in Gaul.
13. Civitati, i. e. the people in general. See Crombie, p. 19; Ramsh. 206.
 Exirent. Subjunc., with ut after verb persuadeo.	See Z.
$ 615 ; A. and S. $ 273, 2.
Esse perfacile, Ac. = “ telling them that it would be an easy thing,” Ac. The infin. is used in this manner in the oratio obliqua, after all verbs implying to say, tell, Ac. See A. and S. § 270, Rem. 2, and $273, 3.
13. Potiri takes ablat and gen. See Z. $$465,466; Crombie, p. 308. Potiri imperio = “ obtain the government.”—Id .... persuasit Construe, persuasit id eis facilius hoc = M he persuaded them to take this course the more easily on this account”
16. Una ex parte, scii continentur.
Altera, used for secundat as is common in divisions; see page 13, lines 1, 2; unam, aliam (= alteram) tertiam.—Sequanos; see Historical and Geographical Index.
Lacu Lemanno, now called the lake of Geneva, in Switzerland.
Fiebat, “ it happened.” See Z. $ 502; A. and S. $ 145, II. 2.
Minus late, i. e. less than they could have desired.
33. Inferre bellum. See Ramsh. 145
33. Pro multitudine hominum, ((in proportion to their population,” or “ the number of inhabitants.” See cap. 29.
33. Ctui, soil, fines. qui .... patebant, “ which extended.”— Millia, (in MSS. and early editions, milia,) a substantive in accus. pi. See Z. $ 395; A. and S. $ 236.—ccxl. .... clxxx., i. e. ducenta et quadraginta .... centum et octoginta. Ph. Cluverius observes that these distances are incorrect, being very considerably too much.
Google176
hf*
98* Ea, governed by comparare.—Quae .... pertinerent, " which might be requisite for their setting out.”
Carrorum. The carrus or carrum was a vehicle peculiar to the Germans and Gauls. On the form and nature ef the construction, see Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Ghreek and Rom. Antiq. p. 217.—Quam is used to strengthen the superlative. See Z. § 108. So in the next clause 31 • Proximis civitatibus, that is, with the neighboring states ot communities of Gaul.
33. Eege, i. e. actu, ac foedere solcmni; “they fix by law tho time of their departure for the third year.”	»
31« Ad eas res conficiendas* The repetition of these words (see line 32) is objected to by Oudendorp, Ciacconius, and other critics, and it would seem not without reason. The answer which Davies gives is, that the Commentaries are not, and were not meant to be regarded as, finished compositions. “ Eas res (says Dr. Schmitz) here refers to all the before- mentioned points: the embassy he undertook himself, (sibi;) but the other matters he intrusted to the care of others.”
33* Persuadet takes the dative, (see Z. §407 ;) the object or accus. follows, line 38, ut regnum .... occuparet.
36* Regnum .... principatum* The former (according to Ramsh., 535) signifies “ autocracy, regal dignity, governmentprincipatus = “ supreme place, precedence.” (See note, p. 15, line 1.) It seems from this and other passages, that the sovereign authority was not hereditary in Gaul; it was probably conferred on the man who was most highly esteemed for justice, bravery, and other popular qualities.
3T* a S* P* R* =s a senatu populi Romani. Oudendoip and others read a S. P. Q. R. = a senatu populoque Romano. The being styled “ friend” (amicus) was esteemed a high honor, and source of protection and advantage to the recipient.
1* Principatum in civitate obtinebat* See cap. 16; Et Lisco, qui summo magistratu praeerat, quem Vergobretum appellant Aedui, qui creatur annuus, et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem. He is said principatum obtinere, who is the leader of his countrymen, but without the name of king. Lactant, Div. Inst. 1, 13.	“ Primis Uranus eminere
inter caeteros potentia coeperit, et principatum habere, non regnum.” See also Caes. Bell. OalL VII. 4; Cujus pater principatum Galliae totius obtinuerat, et ob eam causam, quod regnum appetebat, ab civitate erat interfectus. Yet Sulpicius Severus, Hist. Sacr. 1, 26, relates that Tholas obtained the regnum, and Jairus the principatus, though both had the same power, so that these words are sometimes confounded. (Davies.)
3* Perfacile, &c. Construe, probat illis perficere conata esse perfacile factu = “ Orgetorix demonstrates to them that the accomplishment of their designs would be very easily effected;” more literally, “ that it was a thing very easy to be done.”
4* Imperium, “ properly, the command, which demands implicit obedience ; the command, as of an army, &c., i. e. highest authority; su-
Digitized byin
*«*•
preme authority, which unites with supreme power irresistible will.” iK (Ramsh. 535.)
If on esse dubium, quin* See Arnold, Pr. Jntr. 85, 86.—Totius Galliae, i. e. omnium Gallorum; or it may be explained by the ellipsis of populorum. “ Plurimum possent is construed with a partitive gen. in the same manner that potentissimi essent would have been.” (Andrews.)
6* Copils* The term here signifies resources, including wealth and influence.
7 • Adducti, i. e. C asticus, Dumnorix, and Orgetorix, each of whom was in hopes, by this confederation, to obtain regal power over his own countrymen.
8. Tree .... populos, that is, the Sequani, Helvetii, and Aedui.
9* Potiri, governs genit and ablat. See Z. §§ 465, 466; Crombie, p. 308. See Note, p. 14, line 15.
IO* Sperant* The order is, et sperant sese posse per tres potentis- simoe ac firmissimos populos potiri totius Galliae. On the construction sperant sese posse, see A. and S. § 268, Rem. 3.
11 • Ea res, in reference to the intrigues of Orgetorix to obtain regal power.—Ut, according to Oudendorp, is found only in the more recent MSS. Perhaps we should read ea re, omitting est.—Moribus = legibus, “ laws.”
12* Coegerunt* That is, they declared that he must appear in court and make his defence in chains, for he seems to have boon left at liberty until the day of his trial. (Schmitx.)
13* Damnatum, Ac. Construe, oportebat poenam, ut cremaretur igni, sequi (eum) damnatum.—Poenam* According to Vossius, this kind of punishment was, among the Gauls and the Germans, inflicted on the declared enemies of the state, or on those who entertained hostile thoughts. So, at the close of this book, we read about C. Val. Procillus:
Is, se praesente', de se ter sortibus consultum aiebat, utrum igni statim necaretur, an in aliud tempus reservaretur. For Ariovistus wished to punish him as a spy. Such were also, by the Roman laws, regarded as the enemies of the state; hence Polyaenus, 8, p. 571, Nrf/iow 'PupaW kcXcvovtos iroXepluv KaraeK&Kovt ivaipsiaBat. Even among the Romans, as we learn from the book De Bell. Hisp. a slave was burnt alive, because he had murdered his master. And in this punishment Vossius discerns the same analogy; for, as he who aims at sovereign power is an enemy of the commonwealth, so he is an enemy to a private family who kills its master. In the same way, those Greeks who had voluntarily joined the Persians, were, on the conclusion of the war, by a public decree, decimated and immolated to the gods, as we learn from Diod. S. Bibl. 11, p. 3.
—Sequi = according to Giani, subire.—die constituta, ablat of time.
14* Causae, gen., depending on dictionis, which is governed by die. The term dictio causae was the term applied to the defence of the accused, to his explaining the cause of his conduct.—Judicium refers to the legal investigation of the case.
GoogleNOTES.
JJ IS. Familiam* The word here denotes hi? vassals, dependants, or
slaves, who were occupied in agricultural affairs, and the collection of his revenue. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Gk. and Rom, Antiq, p. 429. —Ad, “about”
16. Clientes* Caesar here speaks more Romano.—Obaeratos, “ debtors,” who were obliged to serve their creditors until the debt was discharged. The word is hence equivalent to vassals.
Se eripuit = “he escaped;” he succeeded in escaping a trial at that time.
Neque abest.... quin* See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 85, 86.
»3* Id. See A. and S/§ 207, Rem. 22.
24. Conantur* From this it appears that the Helvetii must have had other reasons for wanting to quit their country, beside the mere desire of Orgetorix. (Schmitz.)—Ut e finibus suis exeant. These words are not properly needed. They serve simply to explain what is referred to by id quod.
2T. Privata aedificia, the houses which stood apart from towns and villages, i. e. country houses or residences.—Praeter quod. Some read praeterquam quod, which is here equivalent Praeter quod, however, is more elegant, id being omitted.
28* Portaturi* The future act. part, often denotes intention or purpose. See Z. $ 639.—Domum, qs here, is sometimes used in the accus. after a verbal noun. So Cicero, reditus Romam. See A. and S. § 237, Rem. 4.
Mensium* Oudendorp reads mensumSee Z. § 66, (b.)— Molita cibaria, “ ground com or meal,” which is fit for making into bread. The Greek version gives dA^iro.
32* Cum iis, for secum.
34. Noricum was a country of ancient Illyricum, and extended from the Danube to the Alps.
33. Socios* See A. and S. § 230, Rem. 2.
30* Ctuibus itineribus* The repetition of the noun to which the relative refers, is probably an imitation of legal phraseology, such as it occurred in laws, senatus consulta, and the like, and is found in all the classical writers, though most frequently in Caesar. (Schmitz.)
38* Vix qua. Supply parte, via, or regione. Qua vix = ut ea, (with parte, &c.,) and has the subjunctive {ducerentur) following. Davies reads quo vix.
10	1* Prohibere possent, “could prevent a passage.”—Provinciam.
See note, p. 13, line 7.
Allobrogum. The Allobroges had first been conquered by Fabius 8umamed Allobrogicus, B. C. 121; and about two years previous to Caesar’s entrance into Gaul, (i. e. B. C. 61,) the praetor C. Pomptinius had again brought them into subjection. Consult Michelet’s History of France, vol. I. p. 40.
Is .... transitur, “ is fordable in several places.”
Google179
Pertinet, “ extends, reaches over,*’ &c.	jg
T• Allobrogibus, dat., governed by persuasuros (esse.)
8. Coacturos (esse,) fut inf. act of cogo.
9« Ut. ... paterentur, “ to suffer,” &c.
(tua die. Some omit die. See Note, p. 15, line 36. In next lino it is is dies, (masc.) Dies is masc. and fern, m singular, and masc. only in plural. See Z. § 86.
A. d*v. Kal. Aprilis = ante diem quintum Kalendas Aprilis, i. e. the 28th of March, B. C. 58, the same year in which Caesar came into Gaul. His arrival was early in the month of April. In the phrase above, ante “ seems really to belong, in sense, to Kalendas, and to be the cause why Kalendas is an accusative.” (Prof. Key.) Zumpt (Latin Gram. § 869) says: “ This expression, ante diem, must be considered as an indeclinable substantive, since we often find it preceded by prepositions which govern the accusative or ablative.” Consult Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 191-201.
Coss. = consulibus, ablat absol. The year was A. U. C. 696, hr B. C. 58.
14. Conari, “were attempting or endeavoring.”—Maturat, the historical present, which is of frequent occurrence in Caesar.—Urbc, i. e. Rome.
16c Ad Genevam, i. e. in the vicinity or neighborhood of Geneva.
Ad may here be regarded as = apud.
IT. Imperat, &c. He orders the province (see Note, p. 13, line 7) to furnish as large a number of troops as it could muster.—Omnino,
“ only.”
Legio. In the times of the Republic, each legion was divided into ten cohorts; each cohort into three maniples; and each maniple into two centuries. So that there were thirty maniples and sixty centuries in a legion; and if there had always been one hundred men in each century, as its name imports, the legion would have consisted of 6000 men. But this was not the case, the number of men in a legion being different at different times. During the earliest periods, the legion consisted of 3000 infantry and 300 cavalry ; the number was afterwards increased to 4000, 5000, and even to upwards of 6000 ; in the time of Caesar it contained about 4500 men. Consult Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Roman Antiq, pp. 102-107.—Pontem. The bridge was across the river Rhone.
Certiores facti, “ were informed.”
Cujus legationis = quorum, reference being to legatos preceding.
22» Q,ui dicerent, (depending on mittunt.) See Z. § 556; A. and
S.	264, 5.—Sibi.... animo, “ that it was their intention.”
Rogare, viz. se,
Li. Cassium* This disaster had happened B. C. 107. Sea Livy, Epit. lib. 65.
Google180
a**
16	*«• Sub jugum, 44 under the yoke.” The Romans obliged captives
to pass vnder a yoke, indicating a state of subjugation and servitude. Two spears were fixed in the ground, and a third fastened across them at the top. Under these the conquered were compelled to pass, after being deprived of their arms.
28« Temperaturos, 44 would be temperate and abetaia from,” &c. (Schmitz.)
Ut. . .. posset* His object was simply to gain time, since he was not yet ready to attack the Helvetii.
31* Diem = tempus* 44 He would take time,” &c.
32* A* d* Idus, L e. ante diem Idus, the day before the Ides of April, which fell on the 13th of the month. By si quid vellent, Caesar would pretend that he is not aware of their wishes and plans.
34* A lacu Lemanno .... Juram* Critics have been much perplexed with this passage, which at first sight seems to state what was the reverse of the fact. The Rhone in reality flows into the lake, and not the lake into the river; hence some emend thus: quem in fiumen Rhodanum influit, i. e., 44 into which the river Rhone flows;” but not well.* Dr. Schmitz explains the matter in this way: 44 We do not say that a lake through which a river flows, flows into the river, but that the river flows into the lake. But Caesar seems to have had in view the point at which the river comes out of the lake, and where a portion of the water of the lake flows out along with the river, and accordingly into the river. Com» pare lib. VII. 57.” A greater difficulty relates to the position of the wall and ditch which Caesar constructed. If we render, 44 he draws a wall, Ac., from the lake Leman to Mount Jura,” we find that that could not have been the case, since the cutting down of the bridge would have been a positive injury to Caesar, as interrupting the communication between his camp and the country on the other side of the river; besides, towards the end of the chapter we learn that the Helvetii endeavored to cross the river in boats, &C-, which shows that the wall was on the southern bank of the Rhone, and not from the northwest corner of the lake to the mountain; and lastly, had this been the situation of the wall, the narrow passage between the Rhone and the mountain (cap. 6) would have been blocked up, whereas it is stated (cap. 9) that notwithstanding the wall, this had been left free, and (cap. 11) that the Helvetii actually marched out of their country through it Ad montem Juram, hence, may he rendered 44 in the direction of or towards Mount Jura,” along the southern bank of the Rhone. The student will find it advantageous to consult the notes of Vossius, Davies, Clarke, and Oudendorp, in the large edition of Oudendorp; Stuttgard, 1822.
36* Decern* Most of editors read decem novem.
39* Possit* Some read posset, to connect with conarentur in the imperf. The historical present may be followed by either the pres, or imperf.; it is here followed by both. Other instanoes of the same kind occasionally occur. See A. and S. § 258, Rein. 1.
Google181
N*
2* More ct exemplo. See Z. $ 472; A. and S. $ 249, II.	yj
Si Tim facere conentur. “ When the expression of futurity is contained in another part of the sentence, the future of the subjunctive is supplied by some other tense of that mood.” See A. and S. 260, Rem.
(1.)
 Prohibiturum, supply se.—Ostendit, “he declares.”—With ea spe dejecti supply alii, corresponding to alii m the next clause.
3. Ratibus, “ rafts.” These were pieces of timber, or planks pinned together or fastened with cords, having the appearance of a floating platform ; of course they eould be used only in smooth water. The poets sometimes use ratis to signify a ship.—Alii. See note on line above.
Dr. Schmitz, however, says, “ alii which is neither preceded nor followed by another alii must mean * some/ or * a fewso that the meaning is, the Helvetii generally, or most of them, tried to cross by boats, but some tried to ford the river.”
Altitudo, “ depth.”—Si .... possent. Dependent clauses containing an indirect question, take the subjunctive. See Arnold, Pr. Jntr. 467. Si is for an, as often.
7• Operis munitione, in reference to the murum, fossam, castella, mentioned above.
IO. His, governed by persuadere.—Sua sponte, “by or of themselves,” by the means they had at their command.
1 ft* Deprecatore. A deprecator is a person who prays that a thing may not be done; so that the meaning here is, that he might pray the Sequani not to prevent them, (Schmitz.) Eo deprecatore = “ through his mediation.”—Impetrarent, imperf. depending on mittunt, the histor. pres. Supply hoc, i. e. the privilege of going through their territories.
Gratia .... poterat, “by his popularity and generosity had very great influence with the Sequani.” Supply facere.
13. Filiam . . . duxerat. “ Uxorem ducere, wedding a wife, taking a wife; used of the husband who, on the day of marriage, led his bride to his home. In matrimonium ducere, taking in matrimony, equally of the man. See 260.” See Ramsh. 728 ; Crombie, p. 92; Z. § 406. iVu- bere is used when speaking of the female.
Dent, i. e. the Helvetii et Sequani.
Helvetii, i. e. perficit, uti Helvetii obsides dent ut, &c.
Renunciatur. Verbs compounded with re are sometimes used in the same sense as their simples. See cap. 39.
Santonum, &c. The Santones or Santoni inhabited the district to the north of the Garonne, and the town of Tolosa (Toulouse) was situate on the upper part of the Garonne, and a considerable distance from the Santones; but Caesar’s object is to make out that the province was in great danger, and for this reason he exaggerates. (Schmitz.)
Tolosatium ... quae civitas. “ When to the relative is joined a noun, explanatory of the antecedent, but of a different gender or number, the relative agrees with that noun.” See A. and S. § 206» (8.)
16
GoogleNOTES.
YJ 28. Futurum, scii, esse = “ that it would be attended.” The verb is
used impersonally.
2T. Locis .... frumentariis, “ an open and very fertile country.”
Ob eas causas, i. e. the several causes of danger which Caesar has enumerated.—T. Labienum. Labienus had been tribune of the people, B. C. 63, and a strong partisan of Caesar. Subsequently, during the civil war, he was one of his bitterest opponents. Seo Arnold’s Later Roman Commonwealth, p. 237.
Legatum. The legati accompanied the generals on their expeditions. They were chosen by the consul or dictator, and were usually distinguished for military talent In the absence of the consul from the army, the legati, or one of them, took his place, and had the insignia as well as power of his superior. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 575, 576.—Magnis itineribus, “by forced marches.” From cap. 24 it appears that the two legions were enrolled in Gallia Cisalpina, which is here meant by Italiam.
Legiones. See note, p. 16, line 18.
Hibernis. See note, p. 40, line 6.—Proximum, “ shortest”
33* Compluribus, &c. The order is, his pulsis compluribus proeliis.
36* Citerioris Provinciae .. . ulterioris Provinciae. The Provincia citerior was Gallia Cisalpina in the north of Italy. Provincia ulterior was the province beyond the Alps, and the same as that called provincia or nostra provincia. See cap. 1. The town of Ocelum was situate at the very foot of the Alps.
Jg 1. Angustias» See cap. 6, at the beginning.
4. Rogatum. The supine in urn is used with verbs which express motion to a place. See Z. § 668, 2; Arnold, Pr. Intr. 362.*
3. Ita se, &c. Supply dicentes, which is implied in legatos mittunt. —Omni tempore, i. e. ever since their having formed an alliance with the Romans. The Aedui had been the earliest among the Gallic tribes to enter into friendly relations with the Romans, and had always been distinguished for their friendship and fidelity.—Meritos esse .... ut non debuerint. As meritos esse depends on a historical pres., its time is that of the pluperf. (See A. and S. § 268.) Regularly the pluperf. is followed by the imperf.; but in clauses with ut, containing a conclusion, the historical perf. is also properly placed instead of the imperf. See Krebs’s Guide, §264.
T• Forum for sui. A. and S. § 208, (6.)
Q,uo Aedui, Ambarri quoque. The reading varies here. Ou- dendorp and others read, eodem tempore, Aedui Ambarri, necessarii, &c. According to this lection, the Ambarri were not distinct from, but belonged and were related to the Aedui.
Necessarii. Friends or allies, engaged mutually to support and assist each other.
Trans Rhodanum. Only a small part of their possessions was across, i. e. on the north side of the Rhone.
GoogleBOOK I.
P*r>
13* Demonstrant, “ inform him»” &c. Demonstrare has this sense 18 continually in Caesar.
13« Santonos. The MSS. vary between Santonos and Santones. The former is regarded by Ondendorp as the better lection. See note, p. 17, line 23.
Arar, the modern Sa&ne. It formed, to a considerable extent, the boundary between the Sequani and Aedui, whence fines has here its proper meaning, “ boundary.” (Schmitz.)—Quod, in reference to its antecedent flumen. Some MSS. read qui, referring to Arar. See cap. 2, flumine Rheno, qui; Rhodano, qui. There is a similar variation in Livy, lib. i. 3. Quod no doubt is the correct reading.
Lenitate, “ smoothness.” Levitate is pronounced by Oudendorp to be an inferior reading, lenis being the proper word to express the gentleness and placidity of the Arar’s course.
In .... fluat. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 467.
Ratibus. See note, p. 17, line 5.—Lintribus. The lintres were boats formed by hollowing out trunks of trees.
Tres .... traduxisse, “ that the Helvetii had already conveyed across that river three parts of their forces.” Flumen is governed by trans in composition.
De tertia vigilia. De, when joined with words expressing time, indicates that a part of that time is spent along with the time which follows. Hence Caesar here set out before the third watch was at an end. The Romans divided their nights into four vigiliae, which differed in length according to the season of the year. (Schmitz.) Consult Antbon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Roman Antiq. p. 222. Tho third watch began at midnight.
Castris. See cap. 10, at the end. The camps of the Romans were objects of particular attention, and were remarkable for regularity and order. The proper situation was selected by pe^ons sent in advance, under the direction of one of the tribunes. The form of the camp was usually square; it was divided into two parts, and strongly fortified with a ditch and rampart. There were four gates, one on each side. That facing the enemy was porUtyraetoria; the one opposite it, the porta decumana: the side gates were the porta principalis dextra and principalis sinistra. The trench or ditch (fossa) was generally nine feet deep and twelve broad: the rampart (vallum) was made of the earth that was thrown up, (agger,) with stakes (valli) fixed at the top of it.—For a full account of the internal arrangement, discipline, &c., of the Roman camps, see Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 220-223.
Tigurinus. The four pagi or cantons of the Helvetii, reckoning according to their situation from north to south, were the Urbigeni, Ara- brones, Tugeni, Tigurini.
30. Cassium	sub jugum miserat. See note, p. 16, lines
26,26.
32. Ctuae pan ....ea princeps. The place of the antecedent m
Digitized by v^ooQle184
Pag»
Jg sometimes supplied by a demonstrative pron. See A. and S. § 206,3, (a.) Princeps, and primus, prior, solus, &c., are used adverbially instead of their neuters.
36. L. Pisonis, dec. Caesar’s firet wife was Cornelia, the daughter of Ciuna. She gave birth to a daughter named Julia. Upon Cornelia’s death, he married Pompeia, daughter of Q. Pompey aud grand-daughter of Sylla, whom he afterwards divorced. Some time after, in B. C. 59, Caesar married Calpurnia, daughter of L. Piso, consul in B. C. 58, and grandson of L. Piso, the legatus slain by the Tigurini.
3», In Arari, “ over the SaOne.”—With faciendum stfpply esse. See. Arnold, Pr. Intr. 351.
19 Q,uum .... intelligerent, “ when they perceived that he had done in one day what they, with the greatest difficulty, had accomplished in twenty days, viz. the crossing the river.”
4. Cujus legationis* See note, p. 16, line 20.—Princeps, i. e. the principal, leading person = primum locum tenebat.
3. Bello Cassiano* It was customary to name the war after the person or people conquered.
6, Aglt, “ discourses, treats,” &c.
9. Reminisceretur. In the oratio directa, reminiscere or reminiscar ris. See A. and S. § 266, 2, Rem. 1. The same remark applies to tribueret, despiceret, and committeret.—Veteris incommodi, referring to the defeat of Crassus. Incommodi is governed by reminisceretur. See Z. $ 439.
Adortus esset* Vossius notes this as an instance of the figure termed juluais- Divico was unwilling to say fugasset, because that would have derogated from the glory of the Helvetii, and allowed too much to the skill and bravery of Caesar. Hence he uses the language before us. —On the use of the subjunctive, see Arnold, Pr. Intr. 465; A. and S. § 266, 3.
Ne is here connected wi3i the notion of requesting Caesar to remember, as above.
13* Magnopere. Oudendorp prefers magno opere, in this and other places, Bk. II. 5 ; IV. 26; VII. 52. Quanto opere and tanto vpere, are used adverbially in the same manner.
13* Contenderent. Davies and others regard this word as spurious.
16. Constitissent, referring to the Helvetii, who had not yet crossed the Sadne.
IT. Memoriam proderet, "transmit the memory,” i. e. of this calamity, to posterity. The places where great battles have been fought, (as Marathon, Salamis, Cannae, dec.,) have served to perpetuate the memory of defeat and disgrace to the conquered, and of glory and renown to the conquerors.
His, i. e. what Divico had said.—Eo .... dari, “that on this account he was under less hesitation what course to pursue, because,” dec. He was iu no doubt how he ought to act towards the Helvetii.
Google185
Pag»
Legati Helvetii. Oadendorp thinks these words only a mar- J() ginal gloss, since Caesar was addressing these very persons.—Commemoras sent .... teneret. See note above, line 11.
Ferre, scil. se, i. e. Caesar, “that he took it the more heavily,
= he resented it the more indignantly, the less it had happened from any desert of the Roman people;” i. e. he was the more indignant in proportion to his conviction that the Romans the less deserved the defeat they had met with under Crassus.
Accidisset. Many read accidissent.—Qui: the antecedent is populi Romani.—Alicujus: according to the common grammatical rule, it should have been si cujus; but the ali here has a peculiar force, and is emphatic: if they had been conscious of any act of injustice, ever so trifling. (Schmitz.)—Conscius takes the gen. and dat. See A. and S. § 222, R. 3.
Non fuisse. This is the consequent clause, (apodosis,) and the verb accordingly has been changed because of the oratio obliqua, or oblique discourse, i. e. in which the sentiments or speeches of a person are related in the third person instead of the first. In direct discourse it would be, si sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisset difficile cavere. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 459, 460 ; A. and S. § 261, 1.—Deceptum, scii, esse populum Romanum, “ were by this ensnared*, because,” &c.
Commissum, scil. esse, used impersonally.
Q,uod si, “but even if.”
Num, expects the answer “no.” Construe, num etiam posset deponere memoriam recentium injuriarum, &c. Oudendorp reads posse.
So Schneider, and others. See Bk. V. 28; Z. § 603
2T. Eo invito, i. e. without Caesar’s consent.
Gloriarentur. In the speech of Divico, as quoted by Caesar, we do not find any boasting. Probably, however, it was indulged in, as being characteristic of the people and their neighbors. See Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. p. 34. Quod .... gloriarentur, “ that they boasted = their boasting.”
Eodem pertinere, “tended to the same result,” viz. to stir up his indignation.—Consuesse .... concedere. Construe, enim immortales deos consuesse concedere his, quos velint ulscisci pro scelere eorum, secundiores res et diuturniorem impunitatem, quo homines ex commutatione rerum gravius doleant. After quo, there should follow eo secundiores, but the eo is often omitted by the best writers. (Schmitz.)
34. Q,uum, “although.”
36. Polliceantur. See cap. 13, “ in earn partem ituros,” &c.—Et si .... satisfaciant, “ and if they would satisfy the Aedui,” &c.
1. Ejus .. . . testem, alluding to the hostages given by the Roman 20 lieutenant on occasion of the defeat of Crassus.
4. Movent, i. e. the Helvetii.—Equitatum. The cavalry in Caesar’s army was composed of Gauls.
6. Coactum habebat. Habeo, with certain participles, forms a periphrasis. See Z. § 634.—Qui. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 483.
16*
GoogleNOTES.
20 T. Cupidius, “ too eagerly.” See A. and S. § 256, Rem. 9.
Novissimum agmen, “the rear rank.” See Anthon’s Smith's
Dicty.of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 32.—Alieno loco: in military matters aliena loca are unfavorable, and sua loca, favorable places. Thus Davies, who quotes Sallust, Jugurth. c. 54, “ qui sua loca defendere nequiverat, in alienis bellum gerere.” See also cap. 61.
De nostris, (instead of genit.) See Z. § 430, 308.
IO- Sublati, i. e. elati. So Bk. V. 37, “ hac victoria sublatus Ambiorix.” See also Bell. Civ. II. 37.
12* Proelio. See note p. 13, line 12.
13 • Habebat. The object of the verb is the infinitive clauso following.
16. Primum, scii, agmen, i. e. “our van.”
Publice, i. e. in the name of their state.—Flagitare, the historical infin. = flagitabat. The verb is most appropriate to this place; for it denotes a vehement demand, accompanied with reproaches, (vehementem non sine conviciis postulationem.) Cic. ad Fom. 9, 8, (an epistle, which is also prefixed to the first book of Acad. Quaest.,) Metuo ne te forte flagitent, ego autem mandavi ut rogarent. See G. J. Voss. Etym. L. L. v. Flagitium. (Davies.)—Frigora. The climate has, no doubt, much changed, and the temperature become milder. Dr. Schmitz notes that this must have been the month of July according to the calendar, but as the calendar was in great confusion before Caesar reformed and regulated it, (which was B. C. 46, twelve years afterwards,) the mouth of June answered to our April.
Sub septcmtrionibus, “ towards the north,” i. e. with respect to Italy.
Frumento, (governed by uti, below.) Besides his pay, each soldier was furnished with clothes, and received a certain allowance (dimensum) of corn, commonly four bushels a month. For these things a part of his pay was deducted. The soldiers prepared and made bread for themselves out of the grain or corn.
Propterea .... quod, “ because.”
23. Diem ex die, &c., “ the Aedui put off* from day to day, (bringing the com,) told him they were gathering it up, bringing it together, that it was just ready.” Ducere and dicere are historical infinitives.
26. Se ... . duci, “ that he was put off* too long.”
2T. Frumentum. See above on line 22.
Magistratu for magistratui, the dat after praeerat.
Q,uem, referring not to the magistracy but to the person invested with it Some critics regard quern as spurious.—Vergobretum, “ the Vergobretus;” according to Michelet, Ver-go-breith, Gaelic, “man for judgment.” (History of Fiance, vol. i. p. 46, note.)
33. Necessario, “ critical.”
3%. Sit destitutus, “he had been abandoned, left destitute by them,” i. e. they had not supplied him with the necessary com.—On the subjunc. here and above, sublevetur, see A. and S. § 966, 3.
Google187
*MT*
Proponit, «discloses.’*	20
Privati. Oudendorp and others read privatim. The sense is the same.
1 • Hos, i. e. privatos.	2	J
9. Ne expresses a purpose negatively. See A. and S. $ 262, Rem. 5.
—Conferant, quod, &c. The readings differ much here. Oudendorp gives conferant; quod praestare dicant, si jam, &c. Schneider reads conferant: quod praestare debeat, si jam, Sec.
Obtinere, i. e. diutius tenere. (Davies.) They thought or hoped that the Aedui might still retain the supremacy.—Non possint, “ they (the Aedui) cannot.”
Gallorum, meaning the Helvetii.
Debere, scii, se, referring to hos. Some omit debere.—Supera- verint, “ conquered.”
Sint erepturi. See A. and S. § 258, 1, (1.)
Quaeque = et quae.
8* A se, i. e. himself, the Vergobretus.
9. Necessario. Oudendorp has coactus also, which is pleonastic.— Jntelligere sese, “ he well kuew.”
Pluribus .... nolebat, “ he was unwilling these matters should be discussed in the presence of so many.”
Solo, i. e. Liscus. He asks Liscus in private, See.
Iiiberius atque audacius, “ more freely and confidently.”
IT. Ipsum esse Dumnorigem, “that it was Dumnorix himself.”
—Summa audacia, i. e. “ a man of extreme boldness.”
Portoria, “taxes or customs,” the import and export duty paid on goods.
Vectigalia, the public revenues in general.—Redempta habere, see note, p. 20, line 6.
Illo licente, “when he bid,” from liceri, depon. The verb- means, to offer a price for a thing which a person wishes to purchase. The principal men among the Gauls performed the duties of farmen of the customs, on account of the profits resulting from the employment; and the people willingly consented, as these men, being wealthy, would be able to make good any loss or deficiency of the revenue.
23. Largiter posse, “ he had great influence.”
26* Potentiae, viz. augendae.
27. Collocasse. See Ramsh. 815. Collocare in, commonly with the ablat. as above, but here the accus. shows that collocare also implies the notion of “ sending.” (Schmitz.)—Uxorem, i. e. the daughter of Orgetorix. See cap. 3.
Cupere, “ wished well.”
Suo nomine, “ on his own private account”
Si quid, i. e. any thing adverse, any calamity.
Imperio Populi Romani = imperante Populo Romano, “ if the Roman people held the command.**
Digitized by Google2|	36.	Q,uod proelium, &c. This passage i& perplexed and variously
explained by commentatore, (see notes in Oudendorp’s edition of Caesar’s works.) Other readings have been given. Giani has 44 reperiehat etiam Caesar inquirendo quod initium fugae proelii equestris adversi a Dumnorige atque ejus equitibus factum esset” So, too, Ciacconius, Gryphi os, &c. Prof. Andrews explains the reading in the text as follows: “ that in regard to this, that there had been an unsuccessful engagement of the cavalry,” i. e. “ in regard to there having been,” &c. See A. and
S.	§ 206, (14.)
38. Fugae» Flight is implied in the proelium adversum.
39» Equitatu for equitatui, the dative. Caesar is fond of this old form.
22 Certissimae res, “very certain or clear proofs.”—Quod per fines, &c. in apposition with certissimae res.
6» Suo, i. e. Caesar’s.
T» Ipsis, i. e. the Aedui.—Magistratuf i. e. Lise us the Vergobretus.
IO» Rebus, i. e. the reasons which led to the conclusion that Dumnorix must be punished; but there Was one circumstance which #was against (irepugnabat) this conclusion.—Divitiaci. “The other brother was a Druid, a title in all probability identical with that of Divitiacus, which Caesar gives as his proper name.” Michelet’s Hist, of France, vol. i. p. 46.
12» Voluntatem, i. e. benevolentiam or amorem. So Bk. V. 4.
16» Principem, “ a leading man.” See cap. 47.
1 T» Summam .... fidem, “ the highest confidence in all respects.”
18» Ipso, L e. Divitiacus.
20» Eo, i. e. Dumnorix.
24» We quid .... statueret, “ that he would not pass too severe a judgment upon his brother.”
26» Ipse, 1. e. Divitiacus.
2T» IHe, i. e. Dumnorix.
28» Per se crevisset» Dumnorix had grown great or become powerful through his means.—Quibus refers to what is implied in per se crevisset = 44 this power and strength he was employing,” &c.—Nervis, used metaphorically for power, the strength of animals being placed in their nerves and sinews.
31» Commoveri, viz. to intercede in behalf of his brother.—Ei, i. e. Dumnorix
32» Apud eum, i. e. Caesar.
33» Sua voluntate, 44 at hfe desire.”
36» Rogat.... faciat, supply ut.—Tanti ejus .... condonet, 44 he tells him that his (Divitiacus’s) favor is so great with him (Caesar) that, at his desire and entreaty, he pardons the injury done to the Republic and the insult offered to himself.”
39» Adhibet, 44 he brings in.”
3 Omnes suspiciones = 44 all occasion of suspicion.”
Digitized, by CjOOQleBOOK I.
3« Dumnorigi.... ponit, “ he places spies orer Dumnorix. ..23
T. Q,ui cognoscerent. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 483, = “ who should ascertain,” i. e. to ascertain.
Misit, supply homines or exploratores.—Facilem, i. e. ascensum.
Vigilia, See note, p. 18, line 23.—Labienum. See note, p. 17, line 29. Labienus, as being the principal legate, or lieutenant, took the place of Caesar whenever he was absent, hence he is distinguished by the honorary title of propraetor. See cap. 54. For pro praetore, however, Giani and some others read propere, contending that it suits the sense much better, and denying that when the commander was present, as Caesar was here, the legate ever had the title of propraetor. See Ou- dendorp, in loc.
Summum jugum, “the highest point of the ridge.” See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 179 ; A. and S. § 205, Rem. 17 ; and below, line 17.
15, In M, Crassi, scii, exercitu.
Prima luce. In this, as in many other cases, the adjective does not apply to the entire thing expressed by the substantive, but only to a part of it. Hence, prima lux is the first part of the day. Compare summus mons, primo vere, colle medio, &c. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 179.
Ipse, i. e. Caesar.
Equo admisso = “ at a full gallop.”
23. Iusiguibus, the insignia or ornaments of the armor, as of the helmets, &c. (See Bk. II. 21.) The badges on the Roman helmets consisted of crests and feathers: the Gauls wore the horns, &c. of animals, and also various images. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 539.
26. Ipsius, i. e. Caesar.
Multo die, see above on line 17, = “ when much of the day had already passed away.”
Q,uod .... renunciasse, “had brought him back word of what he had not seen, as if he had seen» it.”—Quo consuerat intervallo,
e. at the distance from the enemy described at the end of cap. 15.
Exercitu for exercitui, the dat. sing.—Frumentum metiri, “to measure out corn.” Compare note, p. 20, line 22.
Aeduorum. The Aedui were Caesar’s main dependence for the supply of corn.
3 7. Rei .... existimavit, “ he thought he must provide for a supply of corn.”
39. Fugitivos, “fugitives.” Those who had deserted probably to return home. On the difference between fugitivus, and perfuga, transfuga, deserters who go to serve in the enemy’s ranks, see Ramsh. 476, 783, 1.
1. Decurionis. The number of horse required to every legion was^^ three hundred, divided into ten turmae or tr.oops, thirty to a troop, every turma making three decuriae, or bodies of ten men: each of these decuriae had a commander called a decurion; but he that was first elected
Digitized by Google190
Hn
24 commanded the turma, and was probably called dux turmae; the others were his lieutenants. Every one of the decurioos had an optio or deputy under him. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 104.
4. Non commovissent* Some read commisissent. This omission of the Romans to come to an engagement, though of actual occurrence, is here represented as existing in the thoughts of the Helvetii, and as constituting the reason which led them to believe that the present movement of the Romans was prompted by their fears. (Andrews.) See A. and S. $ 266, 3.
ff. Intercludi posse, i.e. the Romans. They hoped that the Romans could be cut off from their supply of corn.
8* Animum advertit, the same as animadvertit. Id depends on ad in advertit.
10* Colle medio* See above, note on p. 23, line 17.
II* Aciem* Acies is “the order of battle, inasmuch as both the armies are drawn up.” See Ramsh. 838. “ Acies is applied, to an army in martial array.” See Crombie, p. 301. Vegetius says, exercitus instructus; Noltenius, exercitus stans. Compare note, p. 20, line 8.
12* Gallia citeriore* See note p. 17, line 36.
Iff* Eum, scil. locum.
18* Phalange* The Helvetii probably adopted this mode of arranging their forces from the Germans. It is said to have consisted of a dense mass of soldiers holding their shields over their heads so as to form a roof. (Compare the testudo.) On the Macedonian phalanx, so celebrated in the annals of Greece, see Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 100.
19* Primam* The first that they met, of course the lowest on the hill.—Successerunt, “ advanced.”
90* Suo, scil. equo.—Omnium, not of all the horsemen, but merely of all persons of distinction, such as the legates, tribunes, and young Romans of distinction who composed the suite of Caesar. (Schmitz.)
99* Cohortatus. This was the usual practice before a battle.
S3* Pilis, “ javelins or darts.” The shaft of the pUum was partly square, and five and a half feet long; the head, nine inches long, was of iron, and jagged or barbed at the end, so as to be exceedingly difficult to draw out. The pilum was used either to throw or thrust with; and was peculiar to the Romans. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 489.
26* Q,uum .... inflexisset, “ as the iron point had bent itself.”
2T* Evellere, scil. ea, i. e. pila infixa.—Sinistra impedita, viz. with the shield and the dart fixed in it. Their shields, as noted above, were carried over their heads, one shield lopping about half way over another,- so that as the pila were cast from the high ground, a single dart would serve to fasten two or more shields together.
Google191
fHP
98« Multi ut, i. e. ita ut multi.	24
29* Scutum, a shield of an oblong form.—Nudo, “ unprotected.”
30, Pedem referre, “ to retreat.”
31« Suberat, “was near.”—Passuum, gen. pi. depending on mille, which is sometimes used as a substantive in the singular also. See Cicero, pro Milon. 20 ; Philipp, vi. 5.
3 3. Claudebant, “closed the enemy’s line of march” = formed the rear-guard of the enemy.
34. Latere aperto, “ on the right flank,” which was open to attack in consequence of the shields being carried on the left arm.
3T. Romani .... intulerunt, “ the Romans advanced their ensigns (that were now) turned about, two ways” = the Romans having faced about, advanced (against the enemy) in two divisions. The first and second lines charged the Helvetii who had renewed the contest, and the third, having faced about, fought with the Boii and Tulingi. Conversa is regarded by some critics as spurious.
Ancipiti proelio, i. e. dubio marte, says Davies, because they 25 were ignorant to which side the victory inclined. Others say that the engagement is called anceps, because it was fought in two places, at the top and the foot of the hill.
Alteri .... alteri, “ some (the Helvetii) .... others (the Boii and Tulingi).”
Hora septima. The day was divided into twelve hours between sunrise and sunset. They differed in length, of course, at different seasons of the year. The seventh hour would answer nearly to our one o’clock, the sixth hour corresponding exactly with our twelve o’clock, or noon.
Aci multam noctem, “ during a considerable part of the night.”
See note, p. 23, liue 17.
9. Mataras ac tragulas. The matara (or matera) is a Celtic word, signifying a javelin or lance. The tragula was also a species of javelin, thrown by means of a thong. The matara and tragula were chiefly used in Gaul and Spain; the tragula was probably barbed, as it required to be cut out of the wound. See Anthon’s Smith’s Piety, of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 49Q.
Filia. If wo may credit Plutarch, (Vit. Caes. c. 18,) even tho women and children engaged in the battle on this occasion.
Nullam partem noctis itin&rc intermisso. There seems to be ail awkward tautology here compared with what immediately precedes. Oudendorp and others think these or the former words are spurious. Oudendorp inclines to the opinion that the words ea tota nocte continenter ierunt, should be rejected.
16. Sepulturam. Burial, or tho rite of sepulture, was always carefully attended to, in consequence of the notion that the spirit could not enter the abodes of the dead till the body was interred, or at least the soul must wander a hundred years on the banks of the Styx before it
GoogleNOTES.
*»*•
25 could cross. In the most ancient times the Romans buried their dead,* the custom of burning, adopted to some extent in early times, does not appear to have become general till the later times of the republic. Marius was buried, and SyUa was the first of the Cornelian gens whose body was burned. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Chreek and Rom. Antiq. p. 460.
IS* We eds . .. .juvarent* The suhjunc. depends on Utera» nun- ciosque misit, in the sense of mandavit per literas, &c* (Andrews.) See A. and S. $ 273, 2.
Q,ui si =* “ and if they.”—Se eodem, &c. Construe, se habiturum illos, i. e. Lingones, eodem loco quo (in the same manner as) habeat Helvetio».
Cum, is sometimes omitted.
Inopia adducti. After active verbs the cause is seldom expressed by the simple ablat, but either by a prepos. or by the ablatives causa, gratia, &c. with a genit. Sometimes, however, as here, the ablat. is used with ductus, motus, &c. See A. and S. § 247, Rem. 2.
Qui, at the beginning of a sentence, is equivalent to a demonstrative.
Ad pedes, “ at the feet” of Caesar.
26« J ussisset. The subject is Caesar.
Ea. This includes the men os well as the arms. See cap. 29.
Wocte intermissa, i. e. a night intervening between the time of tbeir promise and the time when they must give up their arms.
3 2. Dedititiorum. These were persons who had voluntarily surrendered, with the condition annexed of not being reduced to slavery. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 341.—Aut occultari .... ignorari posse, “ could be either concealed or remain wholly unnoticed.”
33. Prima nocte, “ at the beginning of the night”
Ierant, i. e. ire coeperant; otherwise conquirerent and reducerent are wanting in meaning.
Purgati esse, to be excused, acquitted of sharing in their guilt
Reductos, &c. “ Overtaking the Helvetii in. their flight to the Rhine, he forced them to surrender their arms, and to pledge themselves to return to their own country. Six thousand of them who had fled in the night, in order to escape this disgrace, were brought back by the Roman cavalry, and, to use Caesar’s own language, treated as enemies.” Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. p. 46.
Perfugis. See note, p. 23, line 39.—In deditionem accepit See above, line 32.
2g 2. Fructibus amissis. They had destroyed all the provision, their towns, &c., before they set out See cap. 5.
Quo famem tolerarent. See A. aud S. § 264, 7; Arnold, Pr Intr. $ 60.
Digitized by GoogleBOOT I.
*»*•
♦. Cdptftin facerent. The expression copiam facere = to have plen- 25
ty, and make others partake of it.—Ipsos, scii. Helvetios.
Vacare, “to be uninhabited.”
IO. Boios, &c. Construe, concessit Aeduis petentibus ut (Aedui) collocarent Boios in finibus suis, quod (Boii) cogniti erant egregia virtute : quibus (Boiis) illi, i. e. the Aedui, dederunt agros.
Atque ipsi erant, “ as they themselves were in,” or, u as they themselves enjoyed.”
Tabulae, “tablets” used for writing. The name was applied to any flat substance used for writing upon, whether stone or metal, or wood covered with wax. The latter were the most common, and were employed for almost every variety of purpose. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 944, 924.—Literis Graecis confectae,
“ written in Greek characters.” Morus conteuds (see Barker's Caesar) that by the expression here used we are to understand “ the Greek language.” Oberliu quotes Scaliger as thinking that certain persons, taught the Greek letters by the people of Marseilles, wrote this account in Greek secretly, lest it should be known to the rest of the Gauls and the neighboring people. The more general opinion, however, is that the Helvetii, as well as other tribes, simply used the Greek alphabet in their writings. Marseilles, from whence probably they had become acquainted with it, was a Greek colony in the south of Gaul. Seo Bk. VI. 14.
13. Perlatae. Others read relatae.
16. Ratio, “ an account.”—Exisset . . . possent Dependent clauses, containing an indirect question, take the subjunc. See A. and S. $ 265.
Rerum. Used comprehensively, in the sense of men or classes just alluded to, as in cap. 27, ea refers to both men and arms.
Capitum Helvetiorum = “ Helvetians.”
21« Summa, &c. Ancient writers, as Strabo, Plutarch, &c., differ from Caesar in regard to these numbers. Davies attributes much of the discrepancy to the errors of copyists.
23. Censu habito, “ a census being taken,” i. e. a numbering or review being made. Census, in the Roman sense, was something very different: it was made every five years; and not only was the number of the people estimated, but a general roview was made, and their estates valued.
23. Totius fere Galliae, i. e. Gallia Celtica, the third of the three divisions of GauL. The Belgae were then making preparations for war.
26. Gratulatum, “ to congratulate him, saying,” &c.
Populi Romaul, the objective genit, “the wrongs which tho Helvetii had done to the Roman people.” See Z. § 423, noto 1 ; A. and S.
4 211, Rem. 10.
Non minus ex usu = “as much to the advantage.”—Terrae Galliae. Terra is often thus followed by the name of a country put in apposition with it, instead of an adjective agreeing with it, or the name of
17
Digitized by L^ooQleNOTES.
20 the country in the genii, depending on it ; “ the GaHic country,” or (t the country of Gaul.” (Andrew*.)
30« Florentlsslmis rebus, ablat abed. See A. and S. § 257, Rem 7.
33« Stipendiarias, “tributary.” The stipendiariae urbes of the Roman provinces were subject to the payment of a fixed money tribute, stipendium, in contradistinction to the vectigales, who paid a certain portion, as a tenth or twentieth of the produce of their lands, their cattle, or customs. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom» Antiq. p. 925.
Et jurejurando, &c., viz. in so concilio, and when the meeting was assembled, they all took an oath that no one should divulge the subject discussed in it, &c.
27	1*	Nisi quibus, L e. nisi ii quibus.
4* Fuerant ad, Schmitz thinks the verb esse here contains the idea of coming, whence it is followed by ad. Comp. Cic. ad Attic, x. 16. Ad is usually regarded as equivalent to apud. Ciaoconius and othere reject qui ante .... Caesarem, as an interpolation.
3. Secreto in occulto, tautological. Either secreto or in occulto seems out of place here. Some editors throw out the latter words entirely. Oudendorp defends the reading in the text, interpreting secreto, out of the hearing of others; in occulto, out of sight or view.
6« Caesari* Instead of the possessive and subjective genit, a dative is sometimes used, as the remote object of a verb. See A. and S. $ 211, Rem. 5, 1.
Digitized by Google105
S3* Hospitio* The relation of hospitality existed in ancient times,27 not only between individuals, but also between states, and between individuals and states. See Bk. VI. 5 ; VII. 75. (Schmitz.)
28. Unum se, i. e. Divitiacus.
Postulatum. He did not, however, succeed. See Bk. VI. 12. Cicero (De Divin. i. 41) mentions his arrival, and also that he was one of the Druids.
33. Pejus, “ a worse thing.”
3 7* Juberet, “ was ordering.”
39. Pararentur, “were to be provided.”
1* Uti omnes, viz. Galli.	28
Neque enim, &c. Construe, neque enim Gallicum {agrum) conferendum (i. e. in respect to fertility) cum agro Germanorum, neque hanc (i. e. Germanam) consuestudinem victus comparandam esse cum illa, (L e. Gallica.) The usual order of hic and ille is not preserved in this passage. See A. and S. § 207, Rem. 23. The Gauls, though a rude people, were nevertheless far superior to the Germans in the refinements of society.
4. Ut semel => ** as soon as.”
Magetobriam. Oudendorp reads Admagetobriae. The situation of this place is not known with certainty.
Omnia exempla cruciatusque edere. Clarke reads, omnia exempla cruciatus edere, supposing that edere cruciatus is not good Latin ; but Oudendorp contends that there is no more objection to the phrase edere cruciatus than to edere clades, (Lucan, iii. 680,) edere caedem, ludos, pugnam, (in Tacitus, Livy, Justin, &c.) Morus interprets exempla cruciatusque by hendiadys for exempla cruciatuum, and says exempla = genera. Hence, “ he inflicted upon them every species of cruelty.”
9. Iracundum. Iracundus denotes one of a hot, quick, passionate temper. See Ramsh. 585.
Non dubitare, scii, se, i. e. Divitiacum
Atque exercitus, “ and (that) of his army.”
Deterrere. Supply cum, referring to Ariovistus.
Habita, “ having been delivered.”
26. Respondere .... permanere, historical or descriptive infinitives.
Exprimere posset, “ could extort.” Some read possent, which is wrong, unless also be read expromere. He is said, expromere vocem,
" who speaks exprimere vocem, “ who forces to talk, and extorts words.” (Oudendorp.)
Hoc = tanto.
Prae. Oudendorp reads quam. The reading in the text is that of the Oxford MS. Prae is sometimes joined redundantly to the comparativo. See Z. § 310; A. and S. § 256, Rem. 13.
33. Tamen. Before this word a clause is understood with this mean-
Digitized by v^ooQleNOTES.
23 ing: although the others may not be able to take vengeance on Ariovistus, or expel him, still (tamen) they may take to flight. (Schmitz.)— Sequanis, dat after participle in dus. See A. and S. § 225, III. '
35. Omnes cruciatus, “ all kinds of torture.”
38. With magnam se habere, &c., supply dicens.—Beneficio suo. The allusion is to an act of kindness on the part of Caesar, since Ariovistus, during Caesar’s consulship, and mainly through his influence, had been honored with the title of king and friend of the Roman people, and valuable presents had been made to him. Comp. cap. 35 et 43.
29	1« Secundum ea, &c. “ Besides these, (representations on the part
of the Gauls,) many (other) considerations,” &c.	“	To	have repulsed the
Helvetii was nothing, if the Suevi invaded Gaul. Their migrations were constant, and had already carried there a hundred and twenty thousand fighting men. Gaul was about to become Germany. Caesar affected to yield to the prayers of the Aedui and Sequani, oppressed by barbarians. The same Druid who had solicited the assistance of Rome, undertook to explore the road, and to guide Caesar to Ariovistus.” Michelet’s Histy. of France, vol. i. p. 46.
2. Q,uare = ut propterea. See Bk. V. cap. 31.
IO.	Periculosum videbat, scil. esse, which is commonly omitted after verbs of perceiving, saying, judging, &,c.
12. Cimbri Teutonique. These nations or tribes from the north of Germany overran Gaul, and the Province, and crossed the Alps into Italy in vast numbers. They were completely routed by Marius, B. C. 102. See Arnold’s Later Roman Commonwealth, pp. 37-40 ; Michelet’s Histy. of France, vol. i. pp. 41, 42.
Rhodanus, i. e. the Rhone (alone) divided. As the Gormans were already settled in the country of the Sequani, they might easily cross the Rhone, since it was fordable. See cap. 6.
18. Placuit ei, i. e. Caesar.
Utriusque = here to inter utrumque, i. e. midway between Caesar and Ariovistus. See A. and S. § 213.—Diceret, “ appoint.” See cap. 5, 42, &c.—Summis utriusque rebus, “ affairs of the greatest moment to both parties.”
23. A se. Oudendorp omits a. With that reading, facere is to be supplied.
26. Emolumento, effort, labor, difficulty, &c. Oudendorp prefers emolimento, (from emolior,) which has the same signification.
2T. Q,uid .... negotii, “what business.”
28. Vicisset, the subjunc., used in reference to the sentiments of the speaker, not those of the writer. The student will already have noted this idiom as of frequent occurrence.
30- Responsis, “ answer or reply.”
31 • Tanto . .. affectus, “ having been treated with so much kindness by himself and the Roman people.”
Consulatu suo. This was the year before, B. C. 59.
Google107
V
33« Hanc ... gratiam referret, “ he made this retura,” ironically, 29 (says Andrews,) instead of tam male gratus esset.
33» Gravaretur = “ grudged,” or was reluctant. .
36. Haec esse, &c. Since he was so unwilling to accede to Caesar’s request, these were the demands which he felt it necessary to make. The student must observe that Caesar’s objeot is to drive Ariovistus into some open act of hostility, in order that he may find a good excuse for making war upon him.
37« Q,uain, for aliquam.
1» Etfus, i. e. Ariovistus.—Illis, i. e. the Aedui. See cap, 31. If 30 construed with liceret, the Sequani are meant.
4« Impetraret, i. e. Caesar. Some read impetrasset, which seems to be more in accordance with the general principles of the language. See
and S. § 266, 2, Rem. 4.
3« M. Messala, See. This was three years before, L e. B.C. 6L-— Censuisset, “ had decreed,” probably in this same year.
6» ' Q,uod 8 quantum, or perhaps quoad, i. e. “ as far as.”
8« Sese, repeated from above (line 4) for the sake of perspicuity.— Aeduorum, objective genit
13* Item = in the same manner, or with the same right
13« Uteretur, scii. Populus Romanus, “ how it (or they) should use their right”
IT. Stipendiarios* See note, p. 26, line 35»
10* Vectigalia, “revenues.”—Deteriora facereU Some of the Aedui, because of Caesar’s arrival, had ceased to pay their tribute, and othera intended to follow their example.
30* Ipjuria, “ without cause, unjustly,? &c.
31* Convenisset, “had been agreed upon.”
33« Iionge .... abfuturum, “ the name of brothers, given them by the Roman people, would be far from protecting them ; or, would be of no avail to them, (i. e. the Aedui.)”
33* Populi Romani, gen. governed by frater, contained in the adject fraternum.—Quod .... denunciaret, “ as to Caesar’s threatening him,” dec.
34* Re, i. e. Caesar.
33* Invicti Germani	subissent, dec. “ These words told but
too deeply on the Roman army. All that had been reported of the stature and ferocity of these northern giants terrified the smaller race of the south; and nothing was to be seen in the camp but men making their wills.” Michelet’s History of France, voL L p. 47.
37* Inter annos = per annos, “ during (or for the space of) fourteen yearn.”
33* Treviri autem, scii. veniebant questum.
34* Pages, refers here to toe inhabitants of the district. The Smss consisted of a hundred pagi, each of which every year furnished a thousand men to make war abroad. The remainder of
17*
Digitized by GoogleNOTES.
2Qth© inhabitants staid at home to cultivate the ground. Bee Bk. IV. cap. 1.
Minus .... posset, sci). Ariovisto, “ Ariovistus could be lees easily withstood.” See A. and S. § 209, Rem. 3, (6.)
31	1*	Itineribus.	An	ordinary	day’s march for soldiers was eight Ro
man miles, (something less than eight English miles.) This is according to Dr. Schmitz’s note on this passage; but compare note, p. 48, line 17, where the distance usually travelled by Roman soldiers on a day’s march is rated as much more.
4. Vesontionem, the modern Besangon, on the river Dubis, now Doubs.
6# Profecisse, “ had accomplished ” Oudendorp reads processisse, u had advanced.”
V. Magno opere, commonly magnopere.
9* Facultas, L e. copia. See cap. 11. Navium facultas, Bk. III. 9.
IO.	Ad ducendum bellum, “for protracting the war.”
11« Dubis. The MSS. give a great variety of readings in place of the now received lection.—Ut.... circumductum, “ as if drawn around with a pair of compasses,” meaning in a circle.
13. Q,ua flumen intermittit, “where the river intermits,” i. e. ceases to flow in a circular course about the town. Intermittit is here equivalent to cessat, deficit, desinit, &c.
13. Contingant, scii, ripam. Others take ripae as the nom. plural, and radices as the accus. By the construction here adopted ripae is the gen. sing, governed by parte.—Hunc, scii, montem.
91. Q,ui .... praedicabant, “ who declared,” denoting positive assurance.
94« Congfessos, viz. armis or bello.—Aciem oculorum, “the fierce expression of their eyes.”
Non mediocriter, an instance of the figure termed litotes, (a mode of expressing something by denying the contrary.)—Mentes ani- mosque, “ minds and spirits.”
Hic primum, scii, timor.—Tribunis. The number in a legion was originally four, or according to Varro, three, and they were appointed by the general. Afterwards the number was increased to six, and their appointment left to the consuls and praetors. Their duties were to keep order in the camp, superintend military exercises, inspect outposts and sentinels, procure provisions, &c. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 1001.
Urbe, i. e. Rome.
Habebant, &c. A large number of young Romans accompanied Caesar into Gaul, and served as tribunes of the soldiers, or officers of the auxiliary troops.—Quorum alius, &c. “ of whom one having alleged one reason, another another, which they said made it neoee- sary,” &c. V
31* Diceret* For this use of the subjunctive with dico, see A. and S. § 266, 3, (last paragraph.)—Ut ejus, i. e. Caesar’s.
33* Vultum fingere, “ compose their countenance,” i. e. assume a
cheerful appearance or demeanor.
36. Totis castris, ablat. of place, without a preposition.—Testa- menta, “ wills.” Consult Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 960-965.
38. Centuriones, “centurions;” properly commanders of a hundred men. There were sixty centurions in a legion, and according os the strength of the legion varied from about three to six thousand, the numbers under a centurion’s command would vary in proportion from about fifty to a hundred. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 231.—Quique = et qui. The decurions of the cavalry are meant: see note p. 24, line 1.—Equitatu for equitatui, the dative.
Rem frumentariam. This accusative is a construction adopted 32 from the Greek, where it is very common ; the ordinary Latin construction would be, aut ut res frumentaria satis commode supportari posset (Schmitz.)
Timere .... ut, &c. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 95.
6. Audientes, “ obedient.”
Omnium ordinum, i. e. of all ranks or grades. There were thirty maniples or companies in a legion, and three in a cohort. As the maniples differed in rank, so also the centurions were of different grades.
See under reference above, p. 31, line 38. Ordinarily councils of war consisted only of the consul, the legati, tribunes, and centuriones primipili, or primorum ordinum, of the first centuries.
11« Sibi quaerendum aut cogitandum, “that it was their place to inquire or consider.”
12. Se consule, ablat. absol. = “ during his consulship.” This was only the year before.
De sua .... ipsius, “ of their own valor, or of Caesar’s watchful care.”
Factum .... periculum, “ that a trial had been made of this enemy,” &lc.
Cimbris, &c. See note, p. 29, line 12.
Videbatur. The use of the indicative instead of the subjunctive denotes a transition from the indirect to the direct discourse.—Nuper,
L e. about fourteen years before.
Servili tumultu. Caesar refers to the war of the gladiators under the conduct of Spartacus. For several years this mixed army of gladiators, slaves, outlaws, (to the number, it is said, of 120,000,) carried devastation over some of the finest districts of Italy. They were, at last, defeated entirely by Crassus with the aid of Pompey, B. C. 72. See Arnold’s Later Roman Commonwealth, pp. 152,159» 100.— Tumultu. The term is applied to any war carried on in Italy. See Ramsh. 145.—Quos,
Digitized by foozle200
J}2»« e. servos, implied in servili. Among these weie many Gauls and Germans.—Aliquid, “ somewhat”
Constantia, “a resolute spirit,” a mind not to be moved by
fear.
26* Inermos* Some read inerme*. The insurgents were, at first, badly provided with arms.
28* In suis, i. e. of the Helvetii.
28* Illorum, i. e. of the Germans.—Superarint. The object to this verb is quos, which must be taken from the preceding quibus.—Qui,
e. the Helvetii.
30* Exercitu, for exercitui.—Adversum proelium. See cap. 31.
33* Neque . .. fecisset, “ and had given them no opportunity of battle”
34* Desperantes, i. e. the Gauls.
33* Magis ratione et consilio, “ more by stratagem and cunning.”
36* Cui .... capi posse, “ that not even he (Ariovistus) could expect that our armies could be ensnared by that stratagem, for which there had been opportunity against men uncivilized and unskilled in warfare.”
3T. Capi = in fraudem induci.
38* In ... . simulationem, “ to the pretence.”
38* Conferrent, “ attributed.”
33	1*	Officio = ability, qualifications for commander, &c.
4* Q,uod, “ as respects this, that,” &c.
8* Facinore, referring to dishonesty or meanness in regard to pecuniary matters.—Conjunctam. Oudendorp reads convictam.
8* Innocentiam, “ integrity.”—Perpetua vita, i. e. u during his whole life.”—Felicitatem, “ good fortune.” This was an important qualification for a general
lO* Bello. See cap. 27.
Col laturus, i. e. dilaturus.-*Repraesentaturum, a law term = statim facturum, would do it at once.
13* Decima* The legions were styled the first, second, &c., according to the order in which they were raised.
Praetoriam cohortem* The praetoria cohors was the cohort of the praetor, or commander, and acted as his body-guard.
21* Princeps *= prima.
22* Optimum judicium, “ a very high opinion.”
23* Paratissimam, “ very ready.”
Egerunt, i. e. they had a meeting with their tribunes and centurions, in which they desired them, &c.
Summa belli, refere to the general management of the war.
2T* Imperatoris = to the general-in-chief. See Anthon's Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Roman Antiq. p. 530.
28* Satisfactione, “ excuse.”
Digitized by Google89» Ut millium, Ac., “ (he discovered) that by taking a circuit of 33 more than fifty miles,” &c.
39* Antea .... postulasse t. See cap. 34.
39* Sanitatem, “ a correct way of thinking.”
1» Petenti, i. e. Caesar.	<	34
Ultro citroque, “ to and fro.”
Alia ratione, “ upon any other terms.”
Equitatu, for equitatui.
Omnibus .... detractis, “ all the hones having been taken
from the Gallic cavalry.”	*
18* Eo = in eos, L e. upon the horses.
16* Ei, “ for. that legion.”
18« Ad equum rescribere, i. e. he raised them to the rank of equites, which was looked upon as a more honorable service, and requiring a higher census than the service on foot When men first enlisted, they were said scribi ; on being promoted from a lower to a higher order, they were said rescribi.
80. Satis grandis, “ of considerable height.”
81* Dictum =3 constitutum.	/
£4. Ex equis, “ on horseback.”
8T. Beneficia, “ acts of kindness.”—Quod rex .... quod .... quod, an instance of the figure termed anaphora, i. e. the repetition of a word at the beginning of successive clauses.
88. Numera* The presents sent to kings usually consisted of an ivory sceptre, an ornamented toga, a curule chair, dec. See Livy, xxx. 15; Tacit Ann. iv. 26.
89* Magnis ... . officiis, “ important services on the part of individuals.”
Aditum, viz. ad senatum.
31* Postulandi, scii, ea praemia.
Ctuam veteres. The Aedui are said by Strabo to have been the first among the Gauls who embraced the friendship of the Romans.— Ipsis, i. e. the Romans.
In eos, i. e. to honor and benefit them, meaning the Aedui.—
Ut, “ how.”
38. Sul, i. e. their rights, power, influence, resources, Ac.
Q,uod .... posset t “ but who oould boar to have that taken 35 from them which they brought to the friendship of the Roman people,”
e. which they possessed when they became friends and aUibs of the Roman people?
3* At, meaning here much the same as saltern, “ at least”
Virtutibus = “merits.”	*
9* A GaUfs, i. e. the Arverni and Sequani, See cap. 31.
14* Omnes. This is beyond the truth. The Aedui and fitear allies alme made war against Aridvisths.
If* Vsttut, soil. OaUi.—De stipendio. Caesar in his demands (as
Digitized by Google302
25 stated above) had made no allusion to the stipendium or tribute; but his demanding Ariovistus to restore the hostages would have deprived Ariovistus of the means of compelling the Gauls to pay it Hence the expression de stipendio recusaret and not stipendium recusare. (Schmitz.)
31* Idque .... petisse, “ and that he had sought it (viz. the friendship of the Romans) with that expectation.”
3*. Deditltii. See note, p. 25, line 32.
34« Q,uod .... transducat, « as to his having brought over,” &c.
36. Nisi rogatus, “ without being requested.”
3T• Defenderit, i. e. arcUerit, propulsaverit. See Bell. Civ. i. 7.
38* Prius .... venisse. Here again Ariovistus misstates the fact, for Domitius (consul, B. C. 122) had long before the present date conquered the Arvemi. See Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. pp. 39, 40.
Sibi, i. e. Caesar.—Suas, i. e. Ariovistus. What was his object in coming into Ariovistus’s possessions ?
Hanc Galliam, this Gaul, i. e. the part which he was occupying, viz. the country of the Aedui and Sequani.
33. Illam, scii. Galliam, i. e. the Roman province.
36. Bello Allobrogum. See cap. 6. Consult note p. 16, line 3. Some suppose (but wrongly, as Davies thinks) that allusion is to the war which Domitius and Fabius Maximus carried on against the Allobroges.
20	1« Amicitia, i. e. for the Aedui: perhaps reference may be to the
friendship alleged to exist between the Romans and Ariovistus.
Sul.... habere, “ had it (the army) for the purpose of crushing him.”—Qut, at beginning of a clause = ille.—Decedat. The tenses in this speech frequently change from the imperfect to the present, and vice versa, and the verbum dicendi, on which the whole depends, must be supposed to change accordingly from the perfect indefinite to the present, “ he said, he says.” (Andrews.)
Bum, i. e. Caesar. There was probably ground for this assertion, since Caesar had violent enemies at Rome who were apprehensive of his designs, and dreaded the consequences of his insatiable ambition.
T. Ejus, referring to Caesar. So too in line 10.
IO. Vellet, scil. Caesar.
13. In eam sententiam, “ to this effect,” or “ to show his opinion.”
13. Ariovisti. See Arnold, Pr. Jntr. 190.
IT. €t« Fabio Maximo. He was consul, B. C. 121. Cf. note, p. 16, line 3.
18. Ignovisset. The Roman people were said to pardon (ignoscere) when they left the people they had conquered free, and permitted them to enjoy their own laws and to choose their own magistrates.—In provinciam redegisset. Those countries wore said in provinciae formam redigi, which were ordered to pay tribute, and which were dispossessed of their own laws, so that magistrates, invested with supreme power, were yearly sent into them to administer the Roman laws, as was done in that same year with respect to the Narbonensis Provincia. But those provinces.
Google203
Fifa
which used their own laws, were called liberae, “free,” as we learn36
from the text. (Hotomann, as quoted by Barker.)
21* Imperium. See Ramsh. 535.
Bello victam, i. e. quamvis.—Uti, infin. of utor, not to be confounded with uti for ut. It governs the ablative.
Voluisset, scii, senatus.
25. Ad nostros adequitare. The repetition of the preposition in compounds of this kind is frequent, but it must not be forced into the text against the authority of MSS. Thus we have, cap. 50 and 51, educere e castris and educere castris; in the second place e has been inserted without the sanction of the MSS.: II. 2, abesse a periculo; II. 33, ex oppido exire. See also ad III. 9, ex navi egredi; IV. 26, &c., per partes perequitare ; IV. 33, V. 44, in eam irrumpere; V. 45, in jaculo illigari, and in almost every page. So adire ad aliquem, and ad aliquid. See Hirt. Bell. Afr. 38, 74, ad oppidum accurrere. Similar expressions in Livy are noticed by Drakenb. ad Praef., “ In civitatem immigraverunthe has even adequitare alicui, and ad aliquem. See cap. 14, and elsewhere. (Oudendorp.)
2T. Fecit.... recepit. Oudendorp commends the reading facit and recipit, notwithstanding imperavit follows, and remarks that this change of tense is elegant, and frequent among historical writers.
Per fidem, viz. hostibus datam, i. 0. during the time that he had pledged himself to abstain from hostilities.
Vulgus militum, “ the common soldiers.”
34-. Interdixisset. Interdico is sometimes used with dative of person and ablative of the thing.
Ut = quomodo, “how.” Oudendorp thinks the word probably spurious, and Clarke is for placing it before fecissent.
Injectum est. The Greek version renders ivi<pv, which led Jo. Wasse to conjecture innatum est, in place of the received lection.
39. Uti aut, &c., asking of him that, &c.
Legatis, is rejected by some editors.	37
T. Procillus. He is spoken of in cap. 19 and 53.
Flacco. Flaccus had been governor of the province of Gaul, in
C. 83. See Cic. pro Quint. 76.
Civitate donatus erat. The freedom of the city was regarded as a great privilege and honor. They who received this mark of distinction were accustomed to assume the praenomen and nomen of the individual by whose influence they had obtained the coveted honor.
Q,ua multa .... utebatur. The expression multa lingua uti is the same as multum lingua uti, “ to make much use of a language,”
“ to speak it often or fluently.”
Peccandi causa, “ ground for exception.”
Hospitio. As the ancients had not proper inns for the accommodation of travellers, the Romans, when they were from home, used to lodge at the houses of certain persons, whom they in return entertained at theirNOTES.
houses in Rome* This was esteemed a very intimate connection, and was called hospitium, or jus. hospitii. The violation of the lawB of hospitality was considered as the greatest impiety. Cf. note, p. 27» line 23. See Aathon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom, Antiq. pp. 511-513.
Q,uae diceret, “ what Ariovistus might say, or had to say.”
Ail. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 120,/.
*1. Eo consilio, u with this design,” viz. to cut off, dec.
23* Dies continuos quinque, « for five days successively.”
84. Pro castris, “ before the camp.”
26» Potestas =• “ an opportimity.” See Ramsh. 820 ; Crombie, p,73.
Hoc, in reference to the description which follows*—Exercuerant» M had exercised” = had trained. Compare Bk. VII. 65.
Quos ex omul, &c., “ whom they had selected out of all the army, each horseman one, for his own protection.”
Cum his, scii, delectis peditibus.
81 . .. .durius, i. e. if the danger was unusually great at any particular point.
81 qui = si quis.
Jubis .... adaequarent, M being supported by the manes of the horses, they could keep pace with them.”
38. Bum locum, quo in loco. Repetitions of this kind are frequent in Caesar. See note p. 15, line 36.
1. Acieque triplloi instructa,44 the army being drawn up in three lines.” This was usual in the Roman army. The hastati occupied the first line, the principes the second, and the triarii or pilani the third. As Caesar nowhere makes use of these terras, it is doubtful whether in his day the lines were distinguished by these names. Compare note, p. 16, line 18.
Hominum millia expedita, instead of hominum millia expeditorum. The light-armed troops carried nothing but their arms, and were extremely rapid in their movements.
Ctuae copiae*. See Z. $ 372, note.
Auxiliorum. The auxiliaries were the troops sent by foreign kings and states in alliance with Rome.
Instituto suo, “according to his plan.”
A ms^loribus, scii, castris.
Prodire» “ come out” of their encampment for the purpose of fighting.
Acriter utrinque. Diodorus (xxxviiL 48) relates that on this occasion Ariovistus came near taking the camp of the Romans, and that he was so elated with this success that he ventured to neglect the prophecies of the women, and to come to an engagement with Caesar.
Proelio. The word here means a regular battle, in which the whafe army takes part See Ramsh. 838; Crombie, p. 85; Arnnid, JV. Intr. 348, note t^-Hanc reperiehat	quod. See A. aud&$ &
Digitized by v^ooQle205
91m Matres ftmiliae* See Pint. Caes. 712. They reposed the ^8
greatest confidence in women, because they thought that there was something holy and prescient in them; whence it came to pass that some of them were reckoned among divinities. Tac. Hist. Bk. IV. 61 ; Vetere apud Germanos more, quo plerasque feminarum fatidicas, et augescente superstitione arbitrentur Deas. So Aurinia and Velleda were deified, Germ. 8. (Davies.)
22» Sortibus, “ lots.” The ancient Germans used various modes of obtaining a knowledge of futurity. Tacitus tells of their cutting small slips of a tree and scattering them at random on a white cloth, of their observing the motion of whirlpools, the noise of waters, &c.
23* Ex usu, “ of advantage, advantageous.”
Fas, here refers to what is in accordance with divine law and religious rites. See Krebs, § 382 ; Ramsh. 596 ; Arnold, Pr. Intr. § 124, note d.—Novam lunam. This oracle applies only to the present case, and at another time the women might advise the very opposite. The new moon was generally considered an auspicious time.
27« Alarios, “the auxiliaries,” so called because placed on the wings (alae) of the army.
28. Pro castris minoribus, “ before the smaller camp.”
30. Triplici .... acie. See above, line 1.
32* Generatim = per gentes, “ by nations or tribes.”
36. Eo = in Us, i. e. in the chariots, &c.
3T. Passis mauibus, “ with outstretched hands.” Oudendorp and others read passis crinibus, “ with dishevelled locks.”
39. Q,uaestorem. The duties of this officer were nearly equivalent to those of our paymaster. It was his business to manage the public accounts, take care of the supplies of provision, money, &c., to sell the booty acquired by conquest, &c. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 828.
Eos, i. e. the legates and quaestor.	^9
Earn partem, i. e. the enemy’s left wing.
Animum adverterat = animadverterat.
Itaque, i. e. et ita.
Pila. See note, p. 24, line 23.
T. Phalange. See note, p. 24, line 18. Of course, as the Germans fought generatim, by nations, there were as many phalanxes as there were tribes or nations.
Scuta .... vulnerarent, “ tore off with their hands the shields (which the enemy held above their heads) and wounded them from above,” i. e. stabbed downwards and wToun^ed the soldiers underneath.
11. Sinistro cornu, i. e. of the enemy.—Dextro, also of the enemy.
Adolescens, properly a person that is growing up, a person from fifteen to thirty years of age. See Ramsh. 29.
Equitatu for equitatui.—Expeditior, “ more disengaged.”
18. Prius .... quam, separated by figure called tmesis.
18
Digitized by21. Lintribus. See note p. 18, line 20.—Reperer ant Some read petierint, which Oudendorp and the beat editions reject
22« Ariovistus. See Bk V. cap. 29.
24« Du$e .... uxores. The Germans usually had but one wife. Their chiefs aud nobles, however, made an exception and had two or more wives. See Tacit. Germ. 18.
Puxerat, « had married.” See note p. 17, line 15.
2T. Duae fillae, nominatives absolute, or supply erant.
84. Neque ejus .... diminuerat, “nor had fortune diminished by his distress or suffering any thing from the great joy and rejoicing, (on this occasion,)” i. e. they were not obliged to diminish aught of their rejoicing by mourning for Procillus’s death.
Sortibus. See note p. 38, line 22.
38. Beneficio, “by favor.”
2. Q,uos Ubii. The Ubii inhabited the right bank of the Rhine, and were hostile to the Suevi. See Bk. IV. cap. 3. The common text has quoe ubi, which is an inferior reading.
Beilis, i. e. the wars with the Helvetii and Germans.
Hiberna. The winter-quarters of the Romans were strongly fortified, and furnished, particularly under the emperors, with every accommodation, like a city, as storehouses, workshops, &c.
T• Citeriorem Galliam, i. e. Gaul south of the Alps, or Cisalpine Gaul.
Conventus agendos. The conventus were court days or meetings of the provincials in certaiu places, at which the governor of the province held his courts of justice. For this purpose each province was divided ihto a certain number of districts or circuits, which were likewise called conventus. The proconsul generally chose twenty distinguished provincials, who assisted him in the administration of justice and formed his council. (Schmitz.) See Authon's Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom Antiq. p. 306.
Digitized by GoogleBOOK SECOND.
SYNOPSIS.
Whilst the Roman army lay in winter-quarters, and Caesar was occupied in Cisalpine Gaul, he received intelligence that a confederacy had been entered into by the Belgae to expel the Romans from the Gallic territory. Having levied two new legions, he made a rapid march northward, and formed a strong camp on the Axona or Aisne.
That he might divide the forces of his opponents, he dispatched the Aeduan troops against the Bellovaci, one of the most powerful Belgic tribes. After two unsuccessful enterprises, the first to storm Caesar’s encampment, and the second to cut off his army from provisions, the confederates, in consequence of the reports they heard of the operations of the Aedui, and compulsion by famine, determined to return to their respective homes, and defend themselves within their separate localities. Previously to the dispersion of their forces, all the tribes had entered into treaties offensive and defensive. Caesar immediately marched against three of the most formidable of the confederates, and at their request agreed on terms of pacification.
However, the Aduatuci and Nervii still persisted in setting him at defiance; and, an advance having been made against the latter people, they very nearly succeeded in routing and destroying the Roman army. According to his own account, the primary fault must be ascribed to Caesar’s rashness, and his contempt of an untried enemy. He sent forward some officers to select a site for a camp on the west bank of the Sambre. The opposite bank of the river (at that point only three feet in depth) was crowned by a wood, in which the Nervian forces were posted, and which Caesar had neglected to reconnoitre. Before he had time to take his position, the Nervii issued from the wood, in so great numbers, and with such celerity, that both the general and his legions were taken by surprise. The military experience of his officers and soldiers induced them to disregard his general orders at such a crisis, and to endeavor, by any means whatever, to keep the foe in check.
When his camp was a thoroughfare ftfr the enemy, and his cavalry in full flight, by his skilful measures, his enthusiasm, and his sovereign sway over the minds of his troops, Caesar rescued victory from the Nervii, almost to the extinction of their name.
Admiring the valiant spirit of this people, and pitying their fallen condition, he restored the survivors to their homes, and laid his commands on the neighboring tribes that they should give them no molestation. The reduction of the Aduatuci followed the defeat of the Nervii, as an easy consequence.
1« In hibernis* Caesar most likely had some of his legions with 41 him in Cisalpine Gaol, who there went into winter-quarters £• Uti .... demonstravimus* See Bk. I. 54.
3* Q,uam, in agreement with its predicate noun» instead of its antecedent Belgas. See A, and S. § 206, (10.)
Digitized by Google208
p»t
*• Dixeramus, i. e. diximus. The pluperfect here indicate* that between the time when he had said it and the present moment, something took place which is now past Caesar is very partial to this use of the pluperfect, dixeramus. Cf. II. 24, 28 ; and IV. 27. (Schmitz.)
6. Omni Gallia, i. e. Celtic Gaul, the Belgae being excepted.
T. Ab nonnullis Gallis, scii. Belgae sollicitarentur.
Partim qui, i. e. quorum pars. The indicative in the sentence fobowiug shows that Caesar is relating his own convictions and not simply the reports which he had heard.
Hiemare et inveterascere = should become accustomed to wintering in Gaul, as in a country wholly subdued.
Mobilitate = propter mobilitatem.
Ab nonnullis. Supply sollicitarentur, referring still to the Belgae.
Ad conducendos homines, “ for hiring troops.”
Earn rem .... consequi, “effect that end,” or accomplish such a design.—In imperio nostro, “ under our government,” i. e. while the Romans held the supremacy in Gaul.
Interiorem. Oudendorp prefers ulteriorem, as more in accordance with Caesar’s usual manner. Davies defends interiorem, “ the interior or central part of Gaul.”
Pedium. Pedius was Caesar’s nephew.
Ipse, i. e. Caesar.
3. Dat negotium, “ he gives orders.”
6. Uti ... . cognoscant, “ to obtain information.”—Apud cos, i. e. Belgas.
T • Constanter, “ uniformly, invariably,” &c.	*
Duodecimo die. These words are probably interpolated.
Celerius omni opinione, “quicker than any expectation;” sooner than any one imagined, &c.
Remi. The Remi inhabited the country between the Mame and the frontiers of the Belgae.—Proximi, &c., i. e. are the first who present themselves to a person going from the Belgae.
16. Q,ui dicerent. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 483. Oudendorp gives instances in which these words are omitted.—Se, &c. Before se, which is the object of permittere, a second se is understood, which is the subject of permittere. See cap. 31; Z. § 605. Permittere is equivalent to committere.
Germanos. They are enumerated in the next chapter, viz. the Condrusi, the Eburones, the Caeraesi, and the Paemani. (See p. 43, line
)—Cis, i. e. on the southern bank of the Rhine.
23. Furorem, “ eagerness, infatuation, madness,” Sec.—Ut ne Suessiones .... consentirent, “ that they could not dissuade even the Suessiones, &c. from uniting with them.”
24« Commgnlntsi suos, 1. e. of the Remi See Raxneh. 49.— Jure	legibus. “ Jus is right* art he authorization of action founded
Google209
p«««
in nature, on law and custom, and as the aggregate of all binding laws, law; lex is a law, or binding precept of superior authority, for actions of free agents; it is a species of the genus jus.” See Ramsh. 596.
2T. Quantae, “ of what force, or how powerful.”
30* Ibi consedisse, i. e. cis Rhenum.
32« Teutones Cimbrosque. See note, page 29, line 12. The more usual form is Teutoni, Teutonos, &c.
Magnos spiritus sibi sumere == to boast greatly. See Bk.
33.
3T, Propinquitatibus affinitatibusque* The former is relationship by blood, (also of every kind of connection and relationship;) the latter is relationship by marriage. See Ramsh. 48.
39* Bellovacos* Their capital was Bratuspantium, afterwards Caesaromagus. The modem name Beauvais is derived from the name of the tribes
2* Armata millia, i. e. armatorum millia.	43
3« Imperium, “ management or direction.
4* Suos, referring to the Remi.—Latissimos. Some prefer laetissimos, bqt the phrases lati agri, campi, &c. are continually used.
6* Potentissimum, scii, regent.—Quum .... tum etiam, “ not only .... but also.”
9* Summam totius belli, “ the management or direction of the whole war.”
12* Longissime absint, u are very remote.”
16* Arbitrari, i. e. Remi se dicebant. These tribes seem not to have been present at the meeting of the Belgae, whence the Re mi are not quite certain about the number of their forces. (Schmitz.)
18* Liberaliter, “ kindly.” Caesar, in his speech, showed them great kindness and friendship.
21* Ad diem* On the very day appointed. See Bk. V. 1; VII. 77.
22* Magno opere, more correct than magnopere, according to Ou- dendorp. So, too, quanto opere for quantopere. It means, “ with great earnestness.”—Rei publicae, i. e. Romanae. The expression, communis salutis, refers to both the Romans and the Aedui.
23* Manus hostium distineri, “ that the forces of the enemy be prevented from uniting.” The importance of this fact is evident by considering that the forces of the enemy amounted to about 300,000, and. Caesar’s to about 60 or 70,000.
27* In unum locum* Locum is frequently omitted by other writers, bat Caesar usually prefers the form ia the text See 1. 34; III. 16; VI.
10; &c.
28* Vidit* He had got his information from the llemi, but he was as confident and certain as if he had seen it himself.
30* Flumen Axonam, quod* See A. and S. § 206, (90
31* Castra* See note, p. 18, line 24.—Quae res. “ This position ”
—Post sum, i. e. Caesar. So ad sum, line 34.
18*
Google210
Pi*
U 3T« Sex cohortibus. The cohort was the tenth part of a legipn, which in Caesar’s days numbered abont 4,500 or 5,000 men, (see note, p. 16, line 18:) hence six cohorts will amount to nearly 3,000 men.
38» Duodeviginti pedum, i. e. in breadth, or, as some say, in depth. —Munire jubet, i. e. the soldiers, (milites.) Sabinus was on the other side of the river. Some prefer to read muniri jubet, u 2. Ex Itinere, M on their march,” and without delaying to pitch their camp. See Bk. 1. 25.
Sustentatum est, “ the assault was supported.”
Gallorum.... atque Belgarum, “ of the Gauls as well as of the Belgae.”—Oppugnatio, “ the mode of attack.”—Haec = “ of this kind.”
Moenibus» “ Moenia, the city wall, especially the highest part of it, as bulwark, fortification.” See Ramsh. 767; Arnold, Pr. Intr. 233 ; Crombie, p. 19.
6» Murum. See references just given.
T • Testudine. The name testudo was applied to the covering made by a close body of soldiers, who placed their shields over their heads to secure themselves against the darts of the enemy. The shields fitted so closely together, as to present one unbroken surface, without any interstices between them, and were also so firm that men could walk upon them, and even horses and chariots be driven over them. A testudo was formed (testudinem facere) either in battle, to ward off the arrows and other missiles of the enemy, or which was more frequently the case, to form a protection to the soldiers when they advanced to the walls or gates of a town, for the purpose of attacking them. Sometimes the shields were so arranged as to make the testudo slope. The soldiers in the first line stood upright, those in the second stooped a little, and each line successively was a little lower than the preceding down to the last, where the soldiers rested on one knee. This was called fastigata testudo. See An- thon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 965.—Portas succe- dunt. This verb takes an accus. as well as dat
Facile, i. e. without danger.
Summa nobilitate. Supply vir.
Venerant. See cap. 3.
Posse. This verb depends on a verb of saying, implied in nuncios mittit.
1£. Eo. Schmitz takes it in the sense of ideo; others render “ thither,” meaning Bibrax.—De media nocte, ** soon after midnight”
If umidas. The Numidians were celebrated warriors, and always endeavored to engage the enemy in the night-time. Their horsemen used neither saddles nor bridles.
IT. Baleares* The Balearic islands are in the Mediterranean, now called Majorca and Minorca. The inhabitants were famous slingem and archers. It is said that boys had no victuals allowed them but what they brought down from some high post with their slings, (Floras, iiL 8.)
GoogleBOOK II.
These troops, the archers and dingers, are here to be considered as a || light-armed infantry.
19« Hostibus .... discessit* The preposition ah is usually expressed after this verb.
21* Q,uos, in reference to both the preceding nouns. The construction of adire with accusative, is common.
Omnibus copiis* Caesar sometimes omits cum; at others, adds it. See I. 26 ; IV. 21, &c.
Et .... posuerunt, “ and encamped within less than two miles.” Ab here signifies “ at the distance of,” the point from which the distance is reckoned being expressed by the distance itself.
2T* Proelio supersedere, “ to decline a battle.”
Sollicitationibus periclitabatur, “ he made frequent trial of.”
Pro = ante.—Loco .... idoneo, ablative absolute.
33. Adversus, i. e. on the side facing the enemy. Schmitz says adversus is an adjective belonging to collis, though in reality applying only to a part of it, viz. that part which faced the enemy.
Dejectus, for dejectio.—Frontem .... redibat, “gently sloping in front, sank gradually to the plain.” The word fastigatus is applied to what has a pyramidical form and terminates in a slender or spiral top.
3T. Passuum quadringentorum, i. e. in length.—Extremas fossas, “ at both ends of the ditch.”
38. Tormenta. These consisted of engines by which large stones and showers of arrows were thrown against an enemy.
1* Pugnantes, “ while fighting.”
T. Si = an.
Secundiore equitum nostrorum proelio. Oudendorp reads secundiore equitum proelio nostris. Schmitz takes secundiore proelio as ablative absolute.
Eo consilio, “ with this design.” See A. and S. 249, II.
IT. Si minus potuissent, “ if they could not succeed in doing this.”
Commeatuque nostros prohiberent, “ and might cut off our men from provisions.” Clarke and others read, commeatusque nostros sustinebant.
Devis armaturae. The cavalry were armed only with javelins.
In eo loco, i. e. where he found the enemy.
Impeditos, “ entangled or embarrassed.”
Per eorum corpora = “ through the midst of.”
2T. Oppido, i. e. Bibrax.
Domum suam. On tms construction of suam with domum, without a preposition, see A. and S. § 237, Rem. 4.
3 2. Ut, quorum. Oudendorp readb et, quorum. With this latter reading ut is understood.
33. Convenirent. Instead of this we might have expected the infinitive convenire, as in the preceding clause we have reverti; but reverti
Digitized by GoogleNOTES.
45® the reel object of the enemy’s decree, whereas convenirent exprewee the intention or purpose for which they are to return. (Schmitz.)
Et... . uterentur, “ and might subsist on the abnndance of provisions which they bad at home.”
Divitiacum atque Aeduos. See cap. 5.
38. His, i. e. the Bellovaci.
30« Non poterat, “ it was not possible to peisnade,” &c. dg 1. Vigilia. See note, p. 18, line 23.
Consimilis, “ very-like.”
Speculatores, “scouts or spies.” These were sent before an army to reconnoitre the ground and observe the movements of the enemy. Under the emperors there was a body of troops called speculatores, who formed part of the praetorian cohorts and had the especial care of the emperor’s person. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Gk. and Rom. Antiq. p. 905.
Exploratoribus. See note preceding. Festus makes a distinction between speculatores and exploratorest which (according to Dr. Smith) is not sustained by the usage of ancient writers.
Novissimum agmen. See note, p. 20, line 8.
Ab extremo agmine, i e. in extremo agmine =* those in the rear, with whom our men first came up, &c.
Ad quos. A relative, like a qualifying adjective when referring to a collective noun, sometimes takes the gender and number of the individuals whom the noun denotes. (Andrews.) See A. and S. § 323, 3, (4.) But Oudendorp suspects the words ad quos ventum erat to be a marginal gloss.
IT. Perturbatis ordinibus, “their ranks being broken.”
Praesidium, “ security or safety.”
Quantum . . . .spatium, i. e. they slew as many as the remaining part of the day allowed them. See Bk. IV. 35.
Destiterunt, scii, interficere.
Reciperent. Recipere ex, “ to recover from.” See Bk. IV. 34.
Itinere coufecto, viz. in fines Suessionum: as soon as he had reached their territory, he hastened (contendit) to Noviodunum, the modern Soissons, which name is derived from the Suessiones, whose capital it was.
Ex itinere, “on his march as he passed along.—Oppugnare, “ assaulting, attempting to conquer by attacks from without.” See Ramsh. 737.
Expugnare, “conquering by storm.” See Ramsh. 413.—Vineas agere. The vineae were roofs of wicker-work resting upon posts eight feet in height. The roof was generally sixteen feet long and seven broad. It was also usually light, so as to be carried by the soldiers. The ■ides as well as the roof were covered with raw hides or wet cloth, as a protection against fire, by which the besieged frequently destroyed the vineae. Under- these the soldiers endeavored to undermine the wall, or
Digitized by GoogleBOOK II.
Pa»
used the aries or battering-ram. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek ^ * and Rom. Antiq. p. 1050.—Quaeque = et quae.
Aggere, The agger was a mound, usually composed of earth, which was raised round a besieged town, and was gradually increased in breadth and height till it equalled or overtopped the walls. At the siege of Avaricum, (Bk. VII. 24,) Caesar raised in twenty-five days an agger three hundred and thirty feet broad and eighty feet high. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 31.
3 Turribus. Besides the towers with which the agger was provided, there were others which were moveable, of great size, and particularly important in storming a fortified place. They were made of beams and planks, and covered, on three sides at least, with iron, and also raw hides and quilts moistened, to protect them from fire. Ancient writers speak of towers six, ten, and even twenty stories high, and from thirty to fifty feet square. They contained various engines, the battering ram, catapultae, balistae, ladders, &c., and were moved forward to the wall on wheels, placed for security inside of the tower. See Authon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 1027,1028.
36. Primis, scii, hominibus.
39. Duxit. Oudendorp reads ducit.—Qui quum se. Qui, at the beginning of a sentence, is often rendered as a demonstrative = “ when these,” &c.
Bratuspantium. See note, p. 42, line 39. The ruins of a town^y called Bratuspante, a little north of Beauvais, are said to have existed as late as the sixteenth century.
3. Majores natu = “ the old men.”
7 • Passis manibus, “ with outstretched hands.” Passis is from pando, to open, to spread out.
lO. Ad eum, i. e. to Caesar.
In fide atque amicitia, “ in alliance and friendship.”
12. Q,ui dicerent, “ who had told them.”
Et . .. . defecisse, et, " they had both revolted, and,” &c.
Q,ui hujus, &c. The order is, (eos) qui fuissent principes (= auctores, “ authors”) hujus consilii, profugisse in Britanniam, quod intelligerent, &c.
Petere non solum. Some of the old editions read, Praeterea petere non solum, &lc.—Bellovacos, &c., “ that not only the Bellovaci, but also the Aedui in their behalf, begged him to exercise,” &c.
20* Amplificaturum, scil. eum, i. e. Caesar.
Q,uorum, referring to the Belgae.—Consuerint, i. e. the Aedui.
Honoris Divitiaci, “of regard to Divitiacus.”
23m Eos, i. e. the Bellovaci.
(tuorum de natura moribusque, “concerning whose character and maimers.”
Nullum aditum esse, i. e. non licere adire ad eos mereo• foribus.
Digitized by Google214
47	30«	Nihil pat! ... esse ... increpitare, &c. Nihil, by. a com
mon specie® of syllepsis, is referred to vinum instead of pati, to which it belongB; “ they suffered no wine,” for “ they did not suffer any wine.” (Andrews.)
31« Ad luxuriam pertinentium. These words are wanting in some of the best MSS. Oudendorp suspects them to be a marginal gloss, which has crept into the text
33. Confirmare, i. e. affirmare, “openly declared.” Caesar frequently uses the verb confirmo in this sense. See Bk. 1.41 ; VI. 33* &c. ; also Cicero, De Amicit. 3.
Triduum. Clarke reads triduo.
Captivis, probably some of the country people whom Caesar had taken prisoners on his march.—Sabim, the modem Sambre, a tributary of the Meuse, into which it falls at Samur.
4Q 1. Consedisse, “ had encamped or taken up a position.”
In Itinere, ««on their march.”
3. Ctuique, i. e. et eos qui.
Conjecisse, i. e. they had quickly or hurriedly taken or sent them.
Exploratores. See note, p. 46, line 8.
Castris. See note, p. 18, line 24.
Dedititiis. See note, p. 25, line 32.
Eorum.... perspecta, “ the manner of our army’s march during those days having been observed.”
Perspecta. Davies reads prospecta, but very inappropriately, according to Oudendorp.
Impedimentorum. The impedimenta included every thing that an army was obliged to carry with it, usually the heavier articles of baggage, such as the tents, &c. For carrying these, mules and horses were employed.
13. Neque esse quidquam negotii, “ and that there would be no difficulty.”
8ub sarcinis. The load, which Roman soldiers carried, is almost incredible; provisions for fifteen days, sometimes for more; utensils, viz. a saw, a basket, a mattock, an axe, a hook, a leathern thong, a pot, &c.; three or four stakes, and frequently more; sometimes as many as twelve Were added: the whole amounted to about sixty pounds weight, besides arms ; for Roman soldiere considered these not as a burden, but as a part of themselves. Under this load it is said that they commonly marched twenty miles a day, often a greater distance. When on a march, the baggage was generally placed either in the middle or in the rear of the army.
19. Adjuvabat.... quod Nervii, “ it added weight also to the advice of those who brought the information that the Nervii,” &c.
Teneris arboribus Incisis atque flexis. The young trees or saplingB were notched or cut in sufficiently to allow of bending them to a horizontal direction. The branches continuing to grow, would shoot forth laterally. Among these branches the brambles and thorns being
Google215
pv
placed very thickly, they altogether formed a hedge so close that the cav-^g airy could uot penetrate through them, and formed, as Caesar states, a fortification not unlike to a regular wall. The reading here is perplexed. Some editors have que after crebris, and enatis after ramis, which Ou- dendorp rejects. The passage is also variously pointed. We have followed Oudendorp.
26. Non modo, for non modo non, as in many other passages in this author. See Z. § 724, b.
28. Non ... . consilium, “ that this advice ought not to be neglected by them.,,
30. Loci .... quern locum. See note, p. 15, line 36. Caesar is rather fond of this kind of repetition.
31# Summo, viz. colli, “ from its top.”
Collis, i. e. another hill.—Huic, i. e. the hill which the Romans had selected for their camp.
Infima. This is eitner an accus. = quod ad infima loca, or an ablat. with parte understood. The sense is the same either way.
36. Aperto, i. e. the part of the hill not covered with trees.
3 T. Secundum flumen, “ along the river.”—Stationes, “ guards or troops.” See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq.
p. 222.
Aliter se habebat, ac, “ was otherwise than.”	49
3. Expeditas, i. e. unincumbered with the loads usually carried by
the soldiers. See note, p. 48, line 17.
3. Totum agmen claudebant, “ closed up the whole rear,” i. e. formed the rear-guard.
Silvas, referring to the parts of the forest, the whole of which is afterwards expressed by silva.
Cluem ad finem, “ as far as.”
Porrecta. . Schmitz says this cannot belong to loca, on account of its position, and must be taken iu the sense of a substantive. Cf. Bk. VII. 88. Clarke takes porrecta absolutely for porrecta camporum. Oudendorp, if the MSS. would allow, would reject loca.
Opere dimenso, referring to the space marked out for pitching and fortifying the camp.
Convenerat, “ had been agreed upon.”—Ita, “ so,” or “ accord- ingly,” here used as an adverb of time.
Ut, “as,” or “ as soon as.” Ita ut is also rendered, “in the same order or manner in which,” &c.—Constituerant, “ they had formed.” Oudendorp gives various examples of this verb, used in this application, from Livy, Frontinus, &c. See his note, in loc.
Proturbatis, “ repulsed or dispersed.”
In manibus nostris. The phrase denotes that the enemy were so near that they could be almost touched with the hands, or engaged hand to hand in close fight. Cf. Sail. Jugur. 57 ; cupere proelium in manibus facere.
GoogleN»
49	31*	Advtreo coil*, “ up the hilljust as adverto fiumine it up
the river. Some supply ab or ex before these words, so that the hill opposite the camp is meant
24. Vexillum proponendum, “ the standard to be displayed."
The vexillum was a square piece of purple cloth elevated ou a gilt staff, to which a cross-bar was adapted for .the purpose. It was here hoisted over the general’s tent, as the signal to the soldiers to make ready for battle. When they were ready, they were called together by the sound of a trumpet, (signum dare tuba;) they were then harangued by the general, after which the trumpets sounded and the advance began. The watchword (signum, line 28) was given usually by means of a tessera, or tablet, with the word of battle inscribed on it, and passed along from rank to rank. The eignum was sometimes given viva voce, and was whatever word or words the general pleased, as Caesar’s felicitas, at the battle of Thapsus; or Venus genetrix ; or Marius’s Lar Deue; or Sylla’s Apollo Delphicus; or Brutus and Cassius’s libertas, &c.
20, Tuba, This was a long, straight bronze tube, gradually increasing in diameter and terminating in a bell-shaped aperture. The Romans used only wind instruments for their martial music.—Ab opere, i. e. from the works of the encampment.
Aggeris, &,c. They were dispersed in quest of materials for constructing the mound or rampart. See note, p. 46, line 31, and p. 18, line 24.
Successus et incursus. Caesar loves to join two words, of which the one interprets the other: VII. 30, Patienda et perferenda; Bell. Civ. I. 5, Extremum et ultimum; II. 4, Invisis, latitantibus; III. 13, and elsewhere. Incursus is here the interpretation of the more rare word successus, which in this place denotes “ a rapid and prosperous incursion.” So Bk. I. 24: Ipsi confertissima acie rejecto nostro equitatu, sub primam aciem successerunt. (Oudendorp.)
31, Erant subsidio, “ were of advantage.”—Usus, “experience.”
Singulisqiic legionibus, “ and from their respective legions.”
Nisi munitis castris, “until the camp was fortified.”—Hi, scii, legati.
3 7 • Spectabant, “ looked for or minded.” Some read expectabant, “ waited or delayed.”—Per se, “ of themselves.”—Videbantur, i. e. administranda esse.
(inam in partem, &,c., i. e. in earn partem decucurrit, quam partem fors obtulit.
1. Milites .... cohortatus quam, &c., i. ©. he said no more than was necessary to impress upon them the necessity of remembering, &-c.
Telum adjici. Oudendorp quotes Bos’s excellent explanation of the phrase adjicere telum, viz., so to send as to reach the destined place, which is within the throw of the weapon. Adigere has the same force.
T. Pugnantibus occurrit, “he found them (already) fighting.”217
Pag»
Insignia* These were the ornamental parts of the armor, espe-50' cially of the helmet. See Bk. I. 22, and note p. 23, line 23.
Ad galeas induendas. Caesar wishes to show the shortness of the time, which scarcely allowed leisure even for putting on their helmets.
For the Romans, when they travelled, generally carried their helmets appended to their breasts or backs, and but little time was required for putting them on. (Vossius.) Oudendorp prefers the reading inducendas, and says that in general inducere is applied to whatever covers any thing; hence it is properly applied to helmets, which cover the head.— Scutisque tegmenta, (tegimenta.) The Romans were very curious about such matters; their shields were painted or otherwise ornamented. This seems to have been particularly the case under Caesar, of whom Suetonius writes: Habebatque tam cultos, (sc. milites,) ut argento et auro politis armis ornaret. Simul et ad speciem, et quo tenaciores eorum in proelio* essent metu damni. In the most ancient times of Greece, shields had figures embossed or painted on them, not for mere ornament, but for good omens of success in war, and to strike terror into the enemy: see the description of shields in Euripides’ Phoenissae. (Vossius.) The covers were made of leather, and were necessary to protect these ornamented shields from dust or injury to the brass.
12• In = “while.”—Quaerendis suis. Some read quaerendos suos.
Dejectus, “ declivity.”
Necessitas, “ shortness,” or “ exigency.”
Diversis legionibus, the ablative absolute. Schmitz says the structure of the sentence is an unusual one, and might have been, diversae legiones aliae alia, &c. Oudendorp and others read, diversis locis legiones aliae alia, &c.
1T. Impediretur, “ was obstructed.”
Neque quid in quaque parte opus esset, scii, poterat provideri.
Administrari, “ be given.”
In tanta rerum iniquitate, “ in so disadvantageous a position of affairs.”
Acie, the old form of the genitive for aciei. See Z. § 85, note 3 ;
A. and S. § 90, exc. in decl. Sallust (Jugur. 21) uses this old form: et quia die extremum erat. So too Virgil, {Georg, i. 208,) libra die somni- que pares ubi fecerit horas.
Exanimatos. Caesar (says Davies) frequently uses this word to signify those who with difficulty draw their breath, from lassitude. See Bk. III. 19. It is here equivalent to “ panting or breathless.”—His, referring to the soldiers of the ninth and tenth legions.—Ea pars, i. e. the right wing of the Gauls, to which was opposed the left wing of the Romans.
Conantcs, i. e. the Atrebates.
Ipsi, i. e. the Roman soldiers.
Diversae duae legiones, «* two other legions.”
19
GoogleNOTES.
60 a». t«» <= eo tempore et ea re. (Oudendorp.) Some editors omit tum.—Nudatis castris, scii, defensoribus. The legions who were charged with this duty were in pursuit of the enemy.
3 T. Aperto latere, “ on the open flank/* i. e. on the left side, from which the legions had withdrawn.
38» Summum castrorum locum, i. e. the highest part of the hill on which the camp of the Romans was situated.
51	1* lievisque armathrae pedltls. These were the light-armed
troops, called velites from their activity and swiftness. These did not form a part of the legion, but fought in scattered parties wherever they were required. They carried a strong circular buckler three feet in diameter ; the staff of their javelin was two cubits long and about the^ thickness of a finger: and the iron was formed with a fine point, in order that it might be bent on the first discharge, and consequently rendered useless to the enemy. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Aritiq. p. 104.
Dixeram. See towards end of cap. 19.—Advetsis hostibus oc~ currebant, “ met the enemy in flank,” i. e. as they entered the camp they saw before them the enemy, who were already there.
Aliam in partem fugam patebant. The more usual form of expression is aliam partem fuga petebant; good authors, however, use fugam petere. See Livy, ix. 23 ; Virg. Aen. xii. 263, &c.
6. Calones. These were the slaves or servants of toe Roman soldiers, so called from carrying wood (kS\o) for their use. From their being continually with the soldiers, they became quite expert in military •	matters,	and occasionally did good service in emergencies.—Decumana
porta. See note, p. 18, line 24.
8. Praecipites .... mandabant, " fled precipitately.”
#	IO.	Aliique aliam in partem, “ some in one direction, some hi
another.”
13. Ctuum, &c.; construe, quum vidissent nostra castra compleri, &c.
15. Diversos = “ each in a different place or quarter.”
30. Cohortatione, as was mentioned in cap. 21, for in all that has been related, from cap. 21 down to the 24th, Caesar had not taken any part. (Schmitz.)
Ubi suos urgeri. The clauses of this long period depend, as to their construction, upon the verb vidit, line 31. Oudendorp gives the older'form urgueri.
Centurionibus. There were six centurions in each cohort. See note, p. 16, line 18.
Signo amisso. The loss of the standard was considered the height of disgrace, particularly to the standard-bearer, and was sometimes punished with death.
Primopilo. This was the first centurion of the first maniple of the triarii, also called princeps centurionum, primipili centurio. He
Digitized by Google219
was intrusted with the care of the eagle, and had the right bf attending the councils of the general. See Anthon’s Smith’s Diety. of Cheek and Rom. Antiq. p. 231. The MSS. vary here between primopilo, primipilo, and primipili. With the last, centurione must be understood. The form primipilus is condemned by Oudendorp, though adopted by others. See his note, in loc.
Ah novissimis, for notissimorum.
29« Desertbs, i. e. a ducibus, meaning those who no longer had any leaderato urge them on to fight—A fronte, “ in front”
90« Subeuntes, M advancing,” or “ coming up.”
31« In angusto, supply loco. He saw that affairs were now in a critical state, or in an extremity.
33. Signa inferre =± “to advance.”—Laxare, “ to open or extend.”
The maniples, as related above, were crowded together, so as actually to hinder their efforts against the enemy.
3IV Pro se quisque, i. e. each for himself, to the best of his ability, without looking to see what others were doing..
38. Operam navare, “ to exert his utmost efforts.”
3» Conversa .... inferrent, “ having faced about should charge 52 the enemy.” The two legions, here united, were placed back to back, so that the back of each was protected by the other.
4» Alius .... fetrent. Partitives, as alius, alter, quisque, &c., from their containing the idea of plurality, are frequently joined with plural verbs. So Sail. Jugur. 53, alius alium laeti appellant, &c. Schneider reads inferret in this passage.
3. Aversi = “ in their rear.”
8« Cursu incitato conspiciebantur, i. e. cursum incitaverant-et jam conspiciebantur.
12« Q,ui, though referring to legionem, takes the gender and number of milites, included in the word legio. See A. and S. § 323, 3, (4.)
Versaretur = esset, “were.”—Nihil .... fecerunt, “made all the haste they could ;” they did all that was possible, as far as speed was concerned.
21* Se praeferrent, “ thrust themselves forward before the legionary soldien.” They wished and determined to surpass these by their deeds of valor.
22* Praestiterunt, “displayed.”
23* Ut ex tumulo, “ as if from a mound or eminence.”
23* Non nequidquam .... ausos esse, “ had not in vain, or to no purpose dared,” &c.
Flumen, i. e. the Sabis or Sambre.
30. Redegerat. The phrase redigere facilia is rare, though used in other places by Caesar. It is equivalent in meaning to reddere facilia.
33. In aestuaria ac paludes. See cap. 16.
3. trti =3 “to occupy,” viz. to retain and use their own territories gj and towns.
GoogleNOTES.
gg 5. Supra. See cap. 16.
Oppidum. What town is meant is uncertain; some think the modern town of Namur, others Falais.
Ex omnibus in circuitu partibus, “ on all sides round about.”
Ducentorum pedum, genitive, governed by aditus.
14. Ipsi, L e. the Aduatuci.
Agere, “ to drive,” referring to their cattle.
IT. Citra flumen Rhenum, i. e. on the south side of the Rhine.
Post eorum obitum, i. e. after the overthrow of their countrymen. See note, p. 29, line 12. Obitus commonly signifies the death of an individual; here it is used of the destruction of a number of persons.
Exagitati, “harassed.”—Quum alias, &c., i. e. at one time they made war upon their neighbors, at another defended themselves from attack.
Eorum, referring both to hi and to those with whom they had been at war.
Primo adventu. See note, p. 23, line 17.
Excursiones, “ sallies.”—Parvulis proeliis, “ slight skirmishes.”
24:. Pedum duodecim, scil. in altitudinem.
Circummuniti, &c. In besieging a town the Romans used to draw a wall or rampart entirely round it, and at a considerable distance from it. This wall was strengthened with forts or turrets at convenient intervals, and answered the double purpose of cutting off the inhabitants from provisions and supplies, and of guarding against attacks from their allies and friends from without.
Vineis. See note, p. 46, line 28.—Aggere. See note, p. 46, line 31.—Turrim. See note, p. 46, line 32.
2T. Irridere .... increpitare, historical infinitives.
28. (tuo tanta. Tho MSS. and old editions, according fo Ouden- dorp, have quod tanta. The reading in tho text is that of Lipsius, Scali- ger, and others.—Ab. See note, p. 44, line 23.
3 2. In muros, “ to, i. e. near the walls.”
Moenibus. See Ramsh. 767.
Non se existimare. What here follows, down to possent, depends upon the participle locuti, and forms only the introduction to the speech of the Aduatuci, the sum and substance of it being contained in the words which follow. (Schmitz.)
3T. Et ex propinquitate pugnare. These words not occurring in many old MSS., are marked with brackets, as in the text, by Oudendorp: he also thinks dixerunt, in the next clause, suspicious.
39. Unum petere, ac deprecari, i. e. “they requested that he would not do one thing.”
54	2. Audirent. The subjunc. is used as expressing the sentiments of
those who were speaking, not those of the historian. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. § 59.221
***•
Sibi praestare, ** that it was better for them.”—Eam casum, i. e. the calamity or misfortune of being deprived of their arms.
Per cruciatum* The means is often expressed by per with an accus.
lO* Aries. The battering-ram was the chief engine in the attack of places, and was of two sorts, the one rude and plain, the other artificial and compound. The former was nothing more than a large beam, which the soldiers bore on their arms and shoulders, and with one end of it, by main force, assailed the wall. The compound one was a long beam like the mast of a ship, armed at one end with iron in the form of a ram’s head. It was suspended by the middle with ropes and chains, fastened to the beam that lay across two posts; hanging thus equally balanced, it was thrust forward by a number of men, aud drawn back: this was continued until the wall was battered down. The men who worked the ram were protected by a wooden roof over the machine, so as to form a “ testudo.” The besieged made various efforts to defend their walls against the force of this tremendous instrument of attack. They attempted to set it on fire ; they threw down great stones, so as to break off the iron head of the ram ; caught the head of it in a noose, or a large pair of forceps armed with teeth, (called the lupus;) interposed bags of chaff or soft materials between the wall and the ram, &c. The Romans usually allowed terms to a town which surrendered before the ram began to play ; after that they had to endure the consequences of a storm. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 92.
Nisi armis traditis, i. e. nisi arma tradita essent. See A. and
S.	$ 257, Rem. 10.
Fecisset. See cap. 28.
14. Facere, i. e. se facturos. The pres, is here used to denote what is future. See Bk.dV. 21; VII. 21, &c. Andrews takes it as the im- perf., “ they were doing,” implying activity, and ready obedience.
Aggeris. See note, p. 46, line 31.
Sub vesperum, “ towards evening.”
Ne . ... acciperent. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 58, (b.)
Ante inito .... consilio, quod, “ a plot being entered into beforehand, because,” &c.
Deducturos, “ would load or draw off.”
Denique = saltem, “ at least.”
Vigilia. See note, p. 18, line 23.
Eruptionem, “ a sally.”—Celeriter. This belongs to the words ignibus significatione facta, i. e. signo dato.
Ad = “ about.” It is here equivalent to circiter.
38. Sectionem .... universam, “ all the spoils,” i. e. every thing in the town, consisting of moveable property and men. The purchasers generally afterwards retailed the goods to others, and this was called secare. Hence sectio signifies all the goods that are afterwards to be retailed.
19*
Google222
Fmg»
J5 4. Oceanum, i. e. the Atlantic.
Incolerent. This subjunc. depends upon quae, which contains the idea of “ although,” (quum ;) namely, although they lived beyond the Rhine, and thus had nothing to fear, still they send ambassadors, &c. (Schmitz.)
Q,uae ... daturas ... facturas. Some read qui. .. daturos... facturosf referring to legati; but Oudendorp prefers as in the text Nationibus is the antecedent
Dies quindecim, acc., expressing duration of time. It is to be taken with supplicatio, and is equivalent to quindecim dierum, or per quindecim diest—Supplicatio. This was a public solemn thanksgivings or supplication to the gods decreed by the senate, when all the temples were opened, and the statues of the gods frequently placed in public upon couches, to which the people offered up their thanksgivings and prayers. A thanksgiving for a signal victory was commonly for three or five days. To Pompey, on concluding the war with Mithridates, ten days had been decreed. Afterwards they were increased in number to forty, fifty, and even sixty days.
Digitized by LjOOQleBOOK THIRD.
SYNOPSIS.
The Farther Province being tranquilized, Caesar determined that the road by the passes of the Alps, on which travellers and merchants were exposed to many dangers, and heavy imposts, should be rendered a safer thoroughfare and medium of commerce between Italy and Gaul.
With the view of intimidating and coercing the marauding clans, he sent Galba, with one legion, to winter among them ; but, after a hazardous, although successful encounter with thirty thousand mountaineers, that officer was forced to retrace his steps, and pitch his winter-camp within the Roman province. During the same winter, whilst he abode in the remote province of Illyricum, information reached Caesar that the Armoric, or maritime states, cm the west coast of Celtic Gaul, had formed a combination with the Aquitani and Belgae; were making warlike preparations on a great scale ; and, setting at defiance the law of nations, had thrown his envoys into prison. He dispatched orders that shipping should be built on the Loire, and lost no time in hastening in person to the scene of action. Having sent three divisions of his forces against as many sections of the allies, he chose, as his own opponents, the Veneti, the most powerful maritime tribe.
In the absence of his fleet, his first undertaking was to storm their towns, and subdue them by land; but this he discovered to be a fruitless enterprise. Their towns, generally well fortified, were situate on peninsulas or promontories; and their own transports, with those collected from the adjacent states, and from Britain, assembled at any place to which he laid siege, in so great numbers, that they could easily convey the population, with their effects, from one town to another. By this poliey, they gave his troops employment during a great part of the summer.
Brutus, a young man whom he had appointed admiral, arrived with the fleet, formed his line-of-battle near the coast, and received the attack of the Veneti in presence of Caesar and the army. The action lasted from ten in the mom ing till sunset. From their superior adaptation to the tides and tempests of the ocean, and the great height of their decks, Brutus had to cope with many difficulties in boarding the enemy’s vessels; but this purpose having at length been carried into execution, the Roqian discipline prevailed, and few of them effected a retreat to the shore.
At the same time, Sabinus subjugated the Unelli; and shortly alter, Crassus, by two decisive victories, quelled the hostile factions in Aquitania.
About the same time also Caesar undertook an expedition against the Morini and Menapii, but after some partial success, was obliged by the season of the year to lead back his army to winter-quarters.
Pv«
6. Mittendi, scil. eos.	56
0. Portoriis* The portoria signify the money exacted by the inhabitants from the merchants for the liberty of conveying (portare) their merchandise through those places. So Sueton. Jul. 43 ; Peregrinarum
Digitized by Google224
ggjnercium portoria; the sum paid for the importation of foreign merchandise. The Greek version has erroneously, noXXols (fwprtois, as if portoria meant the same as onera. (Davies.)
13* Octodurus, probably the modern town of Martinach in the canton the Vaux.
Id. Hic, L e. vicus.
57	3*	Bum locum, referring to that part of the village in which the co
horts were to pass the winter.
4. Hibernorum. The word generally signifies “ winter-quarters here it means the time spent in winter-quarters.
3. Ho, i. e. the hiberna castra. See note, p. 40, line 6.
8. Id, referring to what has just been stated: the clause from ut to caperent contains a further explication of id. See Bk. VI. 14.
1O* Liegionem, “ a (single) legion.”
11. Plenissimam. A legion was said to be plenissima when it had all the soldiers and officers which belonged to it according to law.—Com- pluribusy scii, militibus.
Sibi persuasum habebant, “ they had a firm perauasiou or conviction.” Vossius says that this expression is so unusual, that he proposes a change in the reading and punctuation.
Opus hibernorum, referring to the various works in connection with the winter-quarters, as buildings, shops, &c.
22« Neque .... provisum, “ nor had a sufficient supply of corn and other provisions been procured.”
Subsidio veniri, scil. posset; “ neither could aid come to them,” i. e. their countrymen could not come to assist them.
3 2. Ad salutem contenderent, “ they should hasten to seek safety.”
Eventum experiri, to wait for the result of the operations of the barbarians.
3T. Collocandis atque administrandis, « for arranging and executing.”
Decurrere, conjicere, &c., historical infinitives.
Gaesae. These were javelins used by the Celtic tribes. We find them mentioned not only in Gaul, Spain, and among the Alpine tribes, but also in Italy.
58** Frustra, “ without effect”
Hoc superari = “ in this they were under a disadvantage.”
Pugnae	proelio. See Crombie, p. 85; Ramsh. 838.
Propter paucitatem, “ on account of the smalluess of their number.”—Non modo for non modo non, as elsewhere.
Sui recipiendi, “ of recovering himself.”
Deficerent. This verb more usually governs the accus.
Languidioribus nostris, ablat. absol. = quum nostri jam languidiores essent.
13. Extremum casum, “ the utmost crisis,” the greatest misfortune which could befall a besieged army.—Primipili. See note, p. 51, line 26.225
Paf*
IS.	Diximus. See Bk. II. 25.	gg
IT.	Unam spem, “ the only hope.”—Extremum auxilium, u the last resource.”
Intermitterent, scil. ut.
Portis. Compare note, p. 18, line 24.
Sui colligendi, “ of rallying themselves.” The expression (like the one above, line 8) is unusual, instead of se colligendi. The sui must be taken as a plur. See Z. § 660.
26. In spem .... venerant, “ had conceived the hope.”
Armis exutis, “stript of their arms.”
Alio consilio. Probably (as Schmitz observes) he intended to enjoy peace, restore his men, and live on terms of friendship with the barbarians.
Aliis occurrisse, i. e. et aliis se occurrisse.
I. Omnibus de causis, “ on all considerations,” or on every ground. §9
Ita = “ for these reasons.”
Illyricum. This also had been placed under Caesar’s government. It bordered on the Adriatic opposite Italy, and included a large extent of country along the Danube.
6. Crassus. See Bk. I. 52; II. 54.
T. Mare Oceanum. The latter word, according to Caesar’s usual manner, serves to explain the former, and limits it to the Atlantic.
Praefectos. This was a name for several kinds of officers, viz. the prefects who commanded the allies, those who commanded the horse, •those who superintended the camp, workmen, &c. The first-named are •here meant, who were in rank equal to the tribunes. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 102.
Tribunos. There were six tribunes in each legion. See note, p.
line 27.—Unellos. Others read Sesuvios; others Esubios ; and others Lexovios.
14. Civitatis, i. e. the Veneti.—Auctoritas. See Ramsh. 126.
Aperto. Properly it ’belongs to the sea itself, though joined to
impetu maris, the impetuosity of the sea. In denotes the cause of the state of things described; = “ as the open sea is very impetuous,” &c.	•
Ipsi, i. e. the Veneti.
Initium, &c., i. e. they were the first who kept back the Roman envoys, and those whom they did retain were Silius and Velanius.
23. Subita	repentina. See Ramsh. 271.
26. Acturos, scil. sc.
2T. Sollicitant, ut. . .. mallent. The imperf. subjunc. after an historical present is not infrequent.
34. Naves longas. Ships or galleys of war were called naves longae, because they were of a longer shape than those of burden, (naves onerariae,) which were more round and deep: the ships of war were chiefly propelled by oars, the ships of burden by sails. The ships of war were variously named from their rows or banks of oars: those having two
Google226
**«•
59 banks, were called biremes; three, triremes; four, quadriremes; five, quinquiremes or penteres. The Romans seldom had ships of more than five banks of oars, and therefore those of six or seven are called by a Greek name, hexeres, hepteres; and above that, by a circumlocution, naves octo, novem, &c., ordinum or versuum. The rowers are generally supposed to have been placed above one another, on different stages or benches on the side of the ship, not in a perpendicular line, but in the form of a quincunx. The oars of the lowest bench were the shortest, and those of the other benches were longer in proportion to their height from the water. There were three different classes of rowers: the first sat in the highest part of the ship, near the stern; the second, in the middle; and the last, in the lowest part, next the prow. Critics, however, differ widely as to the number of oars and rowers, the arrangement of the mariners, &c. See An- thon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rojn. Antiq., article “ Ships.”
Remiges. Slaves were generally employed by the Romans as rowers and mariners. The average number of men in a war galley of ordinary size was two hundred. From the ancient accounts, it seems that they propelled the galleys with very surprising swiftness. Consult Au- thon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 889-895.
Nautas. These had the management of the sails, &c. The soldiers who fought on board the ships were generally raised for that particular service, and styled classiarii or epibatae. In a vessel of the size mentioned in the preceding note, there were on some occasions as many as thirty epibatae added to the crew and marines.—Gubernatores. The gubernator was “ the pilot,” who steered the ship and directed its course: he sat at the helm, and gave orders about spreading the sails and plying the oars. It w as his duty to know the signs of the weather, to be acquainted with ports and places, and particularly to observe the winds and stars: for, as the ancients knew not the use of the compass, they were directed in their voyages, chiefly by the stars in the night-time, and, in the day-time, by the coasts and islands, with which they were acquainted.
39. Cognito. They learned by Caesar’s arrival, that they would have to contend with him, and not simply Crassus.— Quantum .... ad- misissent, i. e. quantum sibi nocuissent, “ how great a crime they had committed against themselves,” i. e. how greatly they had injured themselves by a course of conduct which would recoil upon their own heads.
0Q 1. Facinus. See Rarnsh. 1044.—Legatos .... retentos, instead of retentionem legatorum, “ the detaining of the ambassadors.”
2• Apud. Oudendorp reads ad, which is equivalent here to apud.
Hoc, “ on this account.”
Pedestria, &c., “ they knew that the approaches by land were interrupted by arms of the sea,” &c.
T. Navigationem, “ access by sea.”
lO.	Ut, in the sense of “ granting that or supposing that,” as often.
14r. Aliam .... atque, “ other .... than.”—In concluso mari, i. e. the Mediterranean.
Digitized by Google227
IT. Venetiam. Not a town,but the country of the Veneti. GiauigQ and others take it to be a town, the modern Vannes.
Socios, &c.	“	Caesar	no	longer	concealing	his design of sub
duing Gaul, undertook the reduction of all the coast tribes. He penetrated the forests and marshes of the Menapii and Morini, (Zealand and Guelders, Ghent, Bruges, Boulogne ;) while one of his lieutenants subdued the Unelli, Eburovices, and Lexovii, (Coutances, Evreux, Li- seux;) and another, the young Crassus, conquered ^Aquitaine, although the barbarians had summoned to their aid from Spain, the old brothers-in- arms of Sertorius. Caesar himself attacked the Veneti and other tribes of our Brittany. This amphibious race inhabited neither the land nor the water. Their forts erected on peninsulas alternately inundated and deserted by the tide, could be besieged neither by the one nor the other. The Veneti maintained a constant communication with the other Britain, and was supplied from it. To reduce them, it was necessary to be master of the sea. Nothing checked Caesar. He built vessels, formed sailors, and taught them to secure the Breton ships by using grappling-irons and cutting their ropes. He treated hardly this hard people; but the lesser Britain could only be conquered through the greater. Caesar made up his mind to invade it” Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. p. 47.
Injuriae .... equitum. The equites are the persons sent as legati, who were of equestrian rank, and the injuriae retentorum equitum (See A. and S. § 274, Rem. 5) is the wrong consisting in detaining them, though the personal wrongs which they suffered may be meant to be included.—Rebellio .... defectio. See Ramsh. 324.
26. In primis, ne. Supply metus or cura, a noun of fear or apprehension being implied before ne.—Hac parte, scii. Galliae.—Neglecta, i. e. non punita.
Gallos .... studere. The natural fickleness and levity of the Gauls were almost proverbial.
34. Mandat.... adeat .... contineat, scii. ut. Ut is often omitted before the subjunctive, after verbs of asking, reminding, &c. See A. and S. § 262, Rem. 4.
Auxilio. A very old MS. has in auxilio, “among the auxiliaries,” a reading which Oudendorp does not disapprove.
38. Cum cohortibus legionariis duodecim. As a legion consisted of ten cohorts, Crassus had of course under his command one legion and two cohorts.
Galliam, i. e. Celtic Gaul.	61
3. Eam manum, instead of eorum manum, meaning the forces of
the Unelli and the others.
Extremis lingulis, “ on the extreme points of tongues of land.” These were not so elevated as the promontories.
Bis .... XXIV. Oudendorp reads bis .... XII., according to the MSS., but it seems difficult to reconcile the fact that the tides are twelve hours apart, with the words in the text The Oxford MS. omits
GoogleNOTES.
bis, which would remove the difficulty. Schneider reads his (referring to
the Gauls inhabiting the sea-coast) instead of bis.
Afflictarentur. The subjuuctive denotes here mere possibility ; since the ships might or would be injured, if, &c.— Ulraque re, “ by either circumstance,” i. e. either the ebbing or flowing of the tide.
13. Operis, i. e. the mound and piers erected by the Romans.— Superati, scii, oppidani.—Extruso mari, “ the sea having been kept off or warded off by mounds and ditches.”
16. His, i. e. aggere atque molibus.
IT. Cujus rei, i. e. quarum, scii, navium.
Vasto, &c. The ablatives to portibus are ablat. absolute ; “ as the sea was vast and open, the tides strong,” &c.
Armatae, “ rigged or equipped.”
Planiores, “flatter.”
Decessum, “ ebbing.”—Excipere possent, “ they might be able to meet,” the ships being conceived as an army that meets the dangers arising from shallows and low water.
Vim et contumeliam. As these are persoual attributes, the sea must here bo regarded as personified, as in the preceding seutence.
Transtra. Schmitz takes these for beams running across the boat, so as to make it firm and strong. The usual translation is “ benches of the rowers.”
Alutae tenuiter confectae, “thin dressed skins.”
l>ini, “of linen,” i. e. canvass.
Congressus, “meeting or conflict.”—Una, i. e. sola.—Pulsu remorum. Pulsu is thought to be a marginal gloss. Caesar usually employs incitare, &c. See Bk. III. 14; IV. 25 ; VII. 60, &c.
Praestaret, scil. nostra classis.—Reliqua, “ all other things.” —Pro = “ considering.”—Illis, scii, navibus.
*• Rostro. The rostrum was a sharp-pointed iron attached to the
prow of the aucient ships of war for the purpose of running into and breaking those of the enemy.
Adjiciebatur = jaciebaiur ad.
Scopulis. Others read copulis, referring to the hooks or grappling-irons by the aid of which they boarded the enemy. Scaliger reads incommode with scopulis.
11. Neque his noceri posse, “and they could not be injured.”
Armorum. The arma comprised not only arms but every thing necessary for the equipment of a fleet, such as sails, ropes, anchors, &c.
IT. Q,uam rationem pugnae insisterent, “ what mode of fighting they should adopt” Insisterent contains the idea of great exertion and activity.
Excitatis, I e. on the ships of the Romau6; “ although towers were erected,” &c. These were frequently raised on ships about to engage, from whence stones and missive weapons were discharged.
Digitized by LjOOQle229
Pmge
21» Gravius, “ with greater force.”	g2
24* Muralium falcium* The murales falces were iron hooks fastened to long poles, by means of which the walls of a besieged town were pulled down, or the defenders of a wall dragged down.
25« Destinabant. The verb is used in its primitive meaning, “ to fasten to.”
28. Armamentis. The rigging and tackling of a ship, its sails, sail-yards, oars, ropes, &c., were called by this name.
3 2. Eatere posset, “ could escape observation.”
Dejectis, i. e. from the top of the masts.
Transcendere .... naves, “ to board the enemies’ ships.”
Expugnatis, scil. ab Romanis'.
Q,uo = in quam.	gg
Malacia ac tranquillitas. The words explain each other ; the former (the Greek /laXaWa) being a calm, and the latter the stillness prevailing during a calm.
6. Hora fere quarta, “ about ten o’clock in the forenoon.”
Q,uum .... turn, “ as .... so also;” “both .... and,” &c.
1 1. Navium .... fuerat, “ whatever shipping they had.”
In quos .... statuit, “whom Caesar therefore determined to punish with greater severity.”
Eo .... quo = ideo .... ut,“ for this reason .... that.”
IT. Sub corona vendidit, .“ he sold as slaves.” It was an ancient custom among the Romans when they sold prisoners of war into slavery to put wreaths (corona) on their heads, as a sign that they were prisoners of war. Hence the expression sub corona vendere, “ to sell a person as a slave.” Others understand by the term corona the ring of Roman soldiers who stood around the captives while they were exposed to sale.
Ilis paucis diebus, “ during these few days,” during which Sabinus had been upon his march into their country.
28. Idoneo omnibus rebus, “ convenient in all respects.”
Duum, old form for duorum. See Z. § 115. Note.
Nonnihil carperetur, “was somewhat railed at or upbraided.”
Id, viz. to keep within his camp.
Eo absente, i e. Caesar.
Opinione, viz. the opinion which the enemy entertained of his cowardice and timidity.
Auxilii causa = “ among the auxiliaries.”	04
4. Perfuga, “ a deserter from faithlessness and bad intention : trans-
fuga, from disaffection with his party or thoughtlessness.” See Ramsh.
783, 1.
6. Neque longius, &c., “ and that at no greater distance than the next night, Sabinus,” &c.
Superiorum dierum, a genitive of time.
Cunctatio, “hesitation.”—Confirmatio, “ positive assurance.”—
20
Digitized by LjOOQleNOTES.
***«
04 Inopia. The Gauls acted on impulse maiuly in their expeditions, and seem not to have made regular provision for a campaign of any length.
8pes Venetici belli. The hopes which they entertained in that quarter, for as yet they had not heard the result. See cap. 16.
Non ... . dimittunt, “they do not permit Viridovix and the other officers to leave the council before that,” &c.
IT. Ut = ut si or telut si, “ as though the victory were certain.”
Q,uam minimum spatii, “ as little time as possible.”
Exanimati, “ out of breath.”
Eruptionem, “sally.”
Factum eat, “ it happened.”
Sabinus. Supply certior factus.
35. Animus .... mens. The former is “courage,” the latter “ mind,” or the internal power which thiuks, and impels to action. See Ramsh. 79; Crombie, p. 246.—Minime resistens, “ by no means resolute.”
In Aquitauiam. See cap. 11.
Ut ante dictum est. See Bk. I. 1.
Ex tertia parte, {esse) i. e. ex tertia parte constare, to consist of the third part, or to form the third part Oudendorp thinks the text here corrupt. Some MSS. have ex tertia parte Oallia est, &c., which that critic rather approves.
0g 1. tiuum is repeated after the parenthetical clause just recited.
Paucis ante annis. Allusion is probably to the war with Sertorius, which was concluded tw’enty-seven years before this date.
Mallius. Oudendorp reads Manilius; others Manlius.—Proconsul. This was an officer invested with the power of a consul, and having in charge a province. Usually the proconsul had been consul the year before, but occasionally a mau was made proconsul without having held the office of consul.
Profugisset. Schmitz thinks the occurrences here alluded to belong, in all probability, to the year B. C. 79. See Livy, Epit. 90; Oros. v. 23.
Civitates, “ cities.” The usual meaning of civitas is “state.”
Regionibus, i. e. Aquitania, where Crassus was carrying on the war.
IO.	Plurimum valebant, “ were very powerful.”
Superioribus victoriis, viz. those over Mallius and Praeconi- nus. See cap. 20.
18. Imperatore, i. e. Caesar.
Tamen = tandem. Some editors adopt tandem as the reading.
Vineas turresque. See notes, p. 46, lines 28 and 32.
Cuniculis. These were subterranean passages, so called from their resemblance to the burrowing of a rabbit The object of the cuniculi was to destroy the fortifications of the enemy by withdrawing the earth from the mound, or from under the wall of the city, so that it might bo
Digitized by Google231
overturned.—Aggerem. See note, p. 46, line 31.—Cujus rei, “ in which gg art,” viz. that of constructing mines.
26. Aerariae secturae, “ copper mines.” Some MSS. have stricturae, which is said by critics to mean “ a mass of earth and stone from which iron ore is obtained by means of the furnace.” Schneider reads, aerariae structuraeque, i. e. “ mines and subterraneous structures or passages,” the latter word being an explanation of the former. The reading in the text, however, (which is that of Oudendorp,) is the most generally approved.—Diligentia nostrarum, “ on account of the vigilance of our men.”
Soldurios. This Gallic word is probably equivalent in meaning to devotu
34. Amicitiae dederint. Ondendorp says that dedere se alicui, patriae, reipublicae, is a frequent phrase in Terence, Cicero, Livy, Nepos, and others.
I Is, i. e. those to whose friendship and assistance they had devoted themselves. Diodorus asserts that the Greek soldiers used to take a solemn oath never to abandon their generals, alive or dead. So Tacitus,
De Mar. Germ. 14, says, that it was reckoned infamous among the Germans to return alive from a field of battle where their prince had fallen.
36. Cum iis Adcantuannus. These words are repeated for the sake of perspicuity, in consequence of the long parenthesis preceding.
2* Tamen .... impetravit, “ obtained nevertheless from Crassus to gg be allowed the same terms of surrender (with the rest)”
&• Barbari, i. e. the Vocates and Tarusates.
T • Paucis diebus, quibus, i. e. “ a few days after they had arrived there.” See cap. 17. Instead of postquam, ex qua, or quum, a relative agreeing with the preceding ablative may be used. See A. and S. § 253, Rem. 1.
Citerioris Hispaniae. Hither Spain comprehended the north part of the country, equal in extent to about three-fourths of modem Spain. Ulterior or Farther Spain was the southern or remaining part of the country.
Adventu, ablative of time; “on their arrival.” C/. JV. 34; VII. 5.
Magna cum auctoritate, “ with great confidence” and expectation of success.
a. Sertorio. Q. Sertorius was one of the greatest men and generals of that period. He fled from Rome at the time of Sylla’s triumph, in B. C. 84, and established himself in Spain, where he maintained himself for more than eight years by his humanity, prudence, and valor against the efforts of both Metellus and Porapey. He was treacherously murdered by Perpenna in B. C. 72.—Omnes annos, “ during all the years” . Sertorius had been in Spain.
Capere, in the sense of deligere, to choose a place for a camp.
IT. Instituunt, “begin.”—Quod ubi = “when therefore.”
Google232
PNC«
gg 18. Facile, i. e. tuto, “ with safety, or safely.”
26* Duplici acie* The troops were usually drawn up in three lines, and the auxiliaries placed on the wings. In this instance the arrangement was altered, a double line being used and the auxiliaries placed in the midst.
31* Sese recipere, “ to retreat”
32* Sarcinis. See note, p. 48, line 17.—Inferiores animo, “depressed in spirit”
33* Ctuum sua cunctatione, &c. The reading in this passage is doubtful. As we have given it, timidiores hostes is the nominative to effecissent. The sense is, as the too timid enemy by their delay, and by the opinion which, by their delay, they had created among the Romans, had made our soldiers more courageous. Clarke reads, sua cunctatio atque opinio timidiores, &c.: others have (after Stephens and Vossius) sua cunctatione atque opinione timoris hostes, &c.
67	4* Ad aggerem, i. e. faciendum. On the agger, boo note, .p. 46,
lino 31.
6. Constanter ac non timide, “ boldly and intrepidly.”
T* Ex loco superiore, i. e. ex vallo munitionibusque hostium.— Non frustra, “ not without effect.”
Decumana porta* See note, p. 18, line 24.
14* Intritae, i. e. non tritae, “ not worn out or fatigued.” Clarke reads integrae, which is inferior to the received lection.
18. Prlus .... quam plane	posset, “before it could plainly
be perceived by them,” &c.
24* Contenderunt* Oudendorp reads intenderunt, “ strove.”
2T* Multa nocte = “late at night.”
29* Ctuo in numero, i. e. quorum in numero.
31* Ultimae nationes* Probably the districts beyond the Pyrenees. 36* Supererant, “ remained,” i. e. unsubdued.
38* Longe .... Galli, “ in a far different way from the other Gauls.”
39* Bellum agere* Bellum gerere is more usual.
2» Continentes silvas, “ extensive woods.”
4* Silvarum. See note, p. 49, line 9.
9* Longius, i. e. farther than was right or advisable.
13* Materiam, “timber.”
14* Conversam ad hostem, i. e. “ facing the enemy.”
ISm Magno spatio confecto, “a great space having been finished,” i. e. a great extent of wood having been felled, &c.
19* Sub pellibus, “under the skins,” i. e. “in tents.” It is an ancient military phrase, meaning tents made up of or covered with skias or hides. Canvass does not appear to have been used.
23* Proxime bellum fecerant, (= intulerant,) “ had made war upon him last.”
GoogleBOOK FOURTH.
SYNOPSIS.
During the ensuing winter, two German tribes crossed the Rhine, and defeated the Roman cavalry. Caesar marched against them, and forced their camp. Stimulated bV the frequency of these inroads, he determined to prove to the Germans that he could lay their country open to the Roman armies at his pleasure: in the space of ten days, he constructed a bridge over the Rhine, and, having chastised them, led back his forces, and broke down the bridge.
His next enterprise was, to land a part of his troops on the coast of Britain, as, in all their revolts, the Gauls drew their chief supplies from that island. On the approach of his fleet, the British army covered the shores. His soldiers, intimidated by the depth of the water, the numbers of their opponents, and the formidable array of expert charioteers, hesitated to attempt a landing, until all doubt was set aside by the standard-bearer of the tenth legion leaping from his ship, and his comrades rushing after him to save the eagle. This example was followed by the other legions, and after many changes of fortune, they succeeded in gaining a firm footing on land.
For a long time, the Roman ranks exhibited a scene of the utmost confusion, from the desultory and instantaneous attacks of the charioteers at all points of advantage : as soon as a general charge could be effected, the Britons were forced to give way, and very soon after they sued for peace.
Caesar agreed upon terms of future alliance, and received a part of their hostages ; but an equinoctial storm arising, by which many of his vessels were wrecked on the coast, and those conveying over his cavalry were driven back to Gaul, the British chiefs entered into a conspiracy, and again met in arms. After one victory, he doubled the number of hostages that he had in the first instance demanded; and, as his ships were in a shattered condition, immediately set sail for the continent. Of the British tribes, two only fulfilled the treaty by sending the promised hostages.
Pair»
1* Annus. The year here mentioned is B. C. 55, at the beginning gQ of which the German tribes named in the text crossed the Rhine. As the winter belonged partly to the year 56, and partly to 55, Caesar explains which part he means by the words qui annus fuit. (Schmitz.)
4* Ctuo = in quod. The place appears to have been somewhat below the place where the Mense flows into the Rhine.
&• Exagitati, “ harassed.”
8* Pagos* See note, p. 30, line 34.—Singula millia armatorum,
“ a thousand armed men each,” i. e* ex unoquoque pago.
9* Ex finibus = extra patriam.
IO* Alunt, &c. They who remain at home cultivate the fields, and prepare provisions for themselves and the warriors.
12* Ratio atque usus belli, “ the art and practice of war.”
20*234
p«t*
tjQ l. Incolendi causa, “ for the sake of a residence.'*
2« Maximam partem, “ for the most part" Supply secundum. It is equivalent to maxima ex parte, and is a frequent Graecism in Caesar.
3« Multum sunt, “ are much (employed.")
6« Faciant. Schmitz says that the use of the subjunc. here seems to indicate that the Germans themselves gave this account of their mode of living.—Et .... et, “ both .... and.”
T • Homines efficit, i. e. eos esse homines.
Aperta, “ uncovered, naked.” See a farther account of the dress used J)y the Germans, Bk. VI. 21.
Ut quae hello, &c. The order is, ut habeant (illos) quibus vendant (ea) quae ceperint hello.
Ctuo = eo quod, or the simple quod, “ because.”
Jumentis, according to Schmitz, are here horses, and not oxen or mules.
Gallia delectatur. Clarke reads Galli delectantur.
Importatis. Oudendorp has importatis his: he conjectures importatitiis, {Bell. Afr. 20,) which is adopted by some editors.—Prava. Others read parva.
16. Summi ut sint laboris, i. e. ut summum laborem perferre possint, “ that they may be able to endure the greatest labor.”
Ephippiis. Mr. Yates (in the Dicty. of Antiq. p. 407) contends that ephippium denotes not a mere honse-cloth, a skin, or a flexible covering of any kind, but a saddle-tree or frame of wood, which, after being filled with a stuffing of wool or cloth, was covered with softer materials, and fastened by means of a girth {cingulum, zona) upon the back of the animal.—Ad quemvis numerum .... adire, “ to advance against any number.”
Publice, i. e. “ to the state at large.”
Vacare, “lie waste, be uninhabited.”
Civitatium. The usual form is civitatum. This form occunfin Bk. V. 22 ; VII. 36, &c.
A Suevis, i. e. reckoning from the frontier of the Suevi.—Millia passuum dc. Some read millia passuum c., which Vossius approves, the former number appearing to him incredibly large.
Paulo quam sunt, &c. The reading here is doubtful and perplexed. Oudendorp, and those who follow the reading he gives, understand it thus: et paulo humaniores quam sunt (homines) ejusdem generis, etiam (paulo humaniores) caeteris, (Germanis.) Clarke reads, et qui paulo, &c. Hotomann conjectures, et qui paulo sunt ceteris ejusdem gentis humaniores. Anthon (after Bentley) reads, et paulo quam sunt ejusdem generis ceteri humaniores. The notes in Oudendorp may be consulted to advantage.
3 5. Gravitatem. Some understand the word to mean “ population others “ power and strength.” See Livy xxxiv. 17, who uses gravis in the same sense.
Googlebook iv.	235
In eadem causa, “ in the same condition” as the Ubii.
2. (iuas regiones, instead of ad Rhenum in eas regiones, quas. 71
Aditu, “ at the approach.”—Trans flumen, i. e. on the right or northern bank of the river.
Rursus reverterunt. Davies notes this as a pleonasm not infrequent in the best writers. See Book VII. 9 ; Curtius, iii. 11, 14; &c.
Se . .. . aluerunt, “ they lived upon their provisions.”
20. Infirmitatem, “ fickleness.”
Nihil his committendum, “ that nothing (= none of his plans or purposes) should be intrusted to them.” See cap. 6, near the end.
Est	consuetudinis, “ it belongs to, i. e. it is one of the
Gallic customs.”
26. Vulgus circumsistat, “the mob flock round.”
E vestigio, “ soon, speedily,” &c.
30« Serviant, i. e. they act in perfect reliance on such vague and uncertain reports; they are mere slaves to many-tongued rumor.—Et plerique .... respondeant, “ and since most of persons give them answers invented to please them.”
Occurreret. The verb occurrere is here equivalent to incidere,
“ to become involved.”
3 5 • Germanos, i. e. the Usipetes and Tenchtheri.
3 J • Ah se, i. e. on the part of those who desired the Germans to withdraw from the banks of the Rhine.
Clientes. See note, p. 15, line 16.
2. Dissimulanda (esse,) “ should be concealed.”	rj<^
In ea loca	quibus in locis. The repetition is usual in
Caesar.
Resistere, scii. Us; but Caesar usually omits the pronoun is after quicunque. See Book I. 40 ; VII. 4.
Posse, scil. se.—Vel .... attribuant, “that they should either allot to them lands.”
16. Concedere, “ yielded or were inferior to.” Quibus ne dii immortales pares esse possint. An old and boastful form of expression. So heroes are called in Homer ivrldeot. Thus, Tydidem superis parem. (Dionys. Vossius.)	’Avrideos is applied by Homer to heroes of super
human and godlike strength and courage, and to men who possess some quality, mental or corporeal, in a pre-eminent degree, exceeding the usual powers of humanity, and manifesting divine energy. In like manner Caesar in Orat. ap. Auctorem de B. Hisp. 42: An me deleto non animadvertebatis decem habere legiones populum Romanum, quae non solum vobis obsistere, sed etiam coelum diruere possent? Homer introduces even gods as conquered and wounded by men; on which account Plato De Rep. 2, p. 530, reprehends him. See also Lucian, Jov. Trag. 2, 139. Thus the pagans, impelled by a twofold fury, inappropriately represented those whom they had impiously received into the number of the gods, to be weaker than men, while they believed them to be gods. (Davies.)
Digitized by Google236
r«f«
72	!©•	€t«ae visum est, viz. respondere = what appeared to him right
that ho should answer. As he gives only the conclusion (exitus) of his speech, we are left to surmise the purport of what preceded.
21* Verum, i. e. aequum, “just, proper, consistent with what was right,” &c.—Qui suos, i. e. eos qui sms.
24* Iiicere, scil. iis.
25* Considere, scil. eos.
Impetraturum* Caesar could promise that he would command the Ubii, because, as we learn from cap. 16, he had hostages of the Ubii in his possession.
33* Mosam, the modern Meuse, which empties itself into the main arm of the Rhine at Workum, which is called Waal (Vahalis) below Nimeguen.
37* Et parte quadam .... transit* The text is here in great confusion, and has perplexed critics not a little. That which we have given, differs from Oudendorp’s and agrees with Oberlin, Morus, Lemaire, &,c.
38* Ab eo, scil. loco.
73	3* Citatus, “ with a rapid current”
4* Partes, “ branches.”
T • Existimantur* The indicative is here used because the preceding sunt qui is equivalent to nonnulli, and does not convey the notion of a quality in those nations that might lead to the belief; if the latter were the case, the subjunctive would have been used. (Schmitz.)—Capitibus, “ mouths.”
9* Ut erat constitutum. See cap. 9.
16* Ea conditione* See cap. 8.
22* Praefectos* See note, p. 59, line 8.
23* Mittit* Supply quosdam.
Non amplius DCCC equites* See cap. 2, which explains the reason why so small a number ventured to attack a body 5,000 in number. The German cavalry despised all those who used ephippia. See note, p. 70, line 21.
30* Eorum, i. e. the ambassadors of the Germans.
32* Rursus = vicissim, “in their turn;” as, in their turn our men offered resistance, &c.
33* Equis, scil. Romanorum equitum.
36* In cOnspectum* Clarke and others read in conspectu.
38* Piso. As this is a Roman name, his grandfather, who had been honored by the Roman people, had probably received the Roman franchise. (Schmitz.)
rj£	1. Intercluso, “ intercepted,” i. e. cut off from the rest of the troops.
5* Animum advertisset = animadvertisset.
• T. Caesar .... arbitrabatur	per dolum, &c. « Two great
German tribes, the Usipetes and Tenchtheri, had just emigrated into Gaul. Caesar stopped them ; and under the pretence that he had been attacked by their young men, during parley, he fell unexpectedly upon them and
GoogleBOOK IV.
massacred them to a man.” Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. p. 48. Caesar seems here clearly guilty of deception and gross injustice, and in violation of those very rights of which he boasted himself the defender in the case of the Veneti, he imprisoned the ambassadors and slaughtered their countrymen without mercy. Plutarch relates (Vit. Caes. 12) that when the supplicatio of twenty days was decreed for Caesar’s victories in Gaul and Germany, Cato indignantly denounced Caesar as guilty of bad faith iu this matter, and counselled his being given up to the barbarians. To the same purpose, Sueton. Vit. Jul. 24.
Dementiae. See Ramsh. 72. Dementia denotes madness, folly, want of sense, &c. Amentia implies a total absence of reason and judgment.
Infirmitate, “ fickleness.”
Quibus, i. e. hostibus or Gallis.
Degatis et quaestore. See note, p. 17, line 29 ; p. 38, line 39.
Ne refers to the preceding clause, and indicates the purpose for which Caesar made the communication to his legates and quaestor.— Pugnae, dative, depending on diem, “ a day fit for,” &c.
20. Simul .... simul, instead of the more common phrase simul .... atque, ac, or et.—Sui purgandi, “ of clearing themselves.”
Fallendo, “ by deceiving him.”
Retineri jussit. A violation of the law of nations. Compare note above, line 7.
Discessu suorum, referring to the chiefs and elders who were kept back by Caesar, and without whose advice and guidance the Germans did not know how to act.
Perturbantur. The verb here means “ to be so confounded as not to know what to do.”
3 1 • Hostem, i. e. the Romans.
Pristini, i. e. pridiani, “ of the day before.”
39. Consectandos .... misit. This was nothing less than horrible barbarity, and affords melancholy proof of how little account human life is esteemed when ambition goads the conqueror on.
1. Audito, i. e. of the women and children.
Confluentem. This word is properly a participle or adjective. It is here used substantively, with alveus understood. (Schmitz.)
Reliqua fuga desperata, i. e. all hope of farther flight being taken away.
7• Ex .... timore, “ after the terror of so great a war.”
1 2. Dibertatem, scii, remanendi.
16. Suis .... voluit, “ he wished them to be alarmed for their own possessions also.”
Supra commemoravi. See cap. 9 and 12.
Qui postularent. See Arnold, Pr. Jntr. 483.
Dederent. Supply ut, which is often omitted after verbs of asking, advising, See.• 238
75	8T»	^wr	postularet! “why should he claim any right of
commanding, or any authority beyond the Rhine V* Sui is the personal pronoun governed by ease.
3 2m Reipubllcae, the objective genitive ; by the occupations in which be was engaged for the republic.
34* Opinionem, “reputation.”
33* Ad, in the sense of apud, but ad at the same time contains the idea that Caesar's fame had penetrated to the most distant tribes. (Schmitz.)
70	4.	Proponebatur, “ was placed before his eyes,” i. e. was manifest,
according to the representations of those whom he consulted, and knew the real state of things.
6. Rationem .... Instituit, “ he determined, therefore, upon this plan of a bridge.” The place where this bridge was made across the Rhine has been the subject of much discussion ; the most probable opinion is, that it was somewhere in the neighborhood of Coblentz or Andemach. (Schmitz.) Professor Long agrees entirely with this statement. See Classical Museum, vol. IV. p. 279.76
T. Tigna bina sesquipedalia, “two posts or piles (each) a foot and a half thick.” There were, of course, a number of pairs of posts; hence bina is used. These posts or piles were in length proportioned to the depth of the river, and placed at a distance of two feet from each other.
Fistucisque adegerat, “ and had driven them home with rammers.” The fistucae were machines for driving large stakes or piles into the ground.—Non . ... ad perpendiculum, “ not quite perpendicularly, after the fashion of a stake.”
Ut .... procumberent, scii, tigna. The idea was, to have the piles slope or incline according to the force of the current of the river. The student must remember to look well at the plan of the bridge, in connection with the description her® given.
Bina. This is the reading of Clarke. The common text has duo, which seems certainly incorrect.
Ab inferiore parte, scii, fluminis. So Davies and others. Lipsius thought that Caesar meant to state that the double posts were forty feet distant at their lower end, or the bottom of the river.
Haec utraque, referring to those in the upper and lower part of the river.
Immissis, “ let in between.”—Quantum .... distabat, i. e. the space between the two posts or piles of each pair was two feet. The braces (trabes) were fitted into these spaces.
IT. Fibulis, “ clamps or braces.” These being framed into the posts, one on each side, enclosed and supported the trabes bipedales in this position.—Distinebantur, “were kept apart”—Quibus disclusis, “ these two pairs of posts being thus separated.” The quibus refers to haec utraque, above. The beams let in of course kept the posts apart, and the braces above and below served to keep them together.
18« Revinctis, “ fastened or made firm.”
Digitized by240
7g 21» Directa materie, “ by planks or rafters placed according to
the length of the bridgefrom one cross-beam to another.
22. Nihilo secius, i. e. besides all these means just mentioned, of strengthening the bridge.—Sublicae. Caesar placed the sublicae at the lower part of the river, and against the impulse of the waters, lest the bridge should be driven to the other side, which might have happened from the violence of the current The defensores were merely stakes fixed above the bridge, to prevent the trees thrown iuto the river from reaching the bridge. (Dionys. Voss.)
26. Dejiciendi operis. Supply causa or gratia, which is sometimes, as here, omitted.
28. Materia, i. e. the timber for building the bridge.
35. Comparata, i. e. parata, as in Bk. VII. 61.—Hortantibus iis, “ by the advice of those,” &lc.
77	8«	Huuc .... obtinerent. They selected a position in about the
centre of the country which they inhabited.
Expectare .... constituisse, scil. Suevos.
Compcrit, &c. It seems quite probable that Caesar did not care to push matters to the same extent with the Germans as he had done in similar cases with the Gauls. The former were much more skilled in warfare, and would have proved no mean adversaries.
Ut Germanis, &c. The three following clauses beginning with ut, contain merely an explanation of the preceding words, omnibus rebus his confectis.
Obsidione. This word (“a siege”) when used, as here, of a country or nation, is to be rendered by “pressure” or “oppression.” Cf. Bk. VII. 32.
Profectum. The verb prof cere signifies “ to gaiu an advantage,” “ to make progress,” or “ to succeed.”
18. Maturae sunt, “ are early,” set in early.
Subministrata auxilia. This was the ostensible reason. According to Suetonius, (Vit. JuL 47,) Britanniam petisse spe margaritarum, &c.
Intelligebat. See Bk. II. 4, 14; III. 8, 9.
Usui, “ utility.” Usus is elsewhere employed in the same sense.
Insulam. He calls Britain an island from common rumor; for that such was the case was not discovered till long after the time of Caesar. (Davies.)
Temere = facile, commonly, or upon any slight occasion.— JlXo, i. e. in Britanniam, or ad illos.
Ipsis, scii, mercatoribus.
Usum belli, “ practice in war” = quid in bello possent, Bk.
4.
Arbitratus, C. Voluseuum. Some editors place the comma after Volusenum, thus connecting it with what precedes. See Bk. III. 5. —Navi longa. See note, p. 59, line 34.
Digitized by Google241
*!•
4. Dare, i. e. sc daturos.—Obtemperare, i. e. se obtemperaturos. «70
T. Atrebatibus superatis. See Bk. 11. 23.
Regionibus, viz. of Gaul.
11. Ut.... sequantur, «to embrace the alliance of the Roman people.”
13. aui. Schmitz notes that qui here contains the idea of quum^ whence it is followed by the subjunctive.	^	!
Consilio = “ conduct.”
Fecissent. This seems to allude to what is stated, Bk. III. 28,
&LC.
21* Pollicerentur. Connect by que with excusarent.
Tantularum rerum occupationes, “ engagements m such trifling matteis.”—Britanniae, i. e. to his design of invading Britain.
26. Navibus onerariis. See note, p. 59, line 34.
29. Praefectis. The prefects oommanded the auxibariB*.
39. ^olvit, i. e- solvit naves, “he set sail.” Cf. Bk. V. 23. According to Dr. Halley, the celebrated astronomer, as quoted by Prof. Long, {Classical Museum, vol. IV. p. 276,) Caesar landed in Britain on the 26th of August, B. C. 55, in the afternoon, about a month before the autumnal equinox. According to the same authority, the place of his landing was between the chalk rocks of Dover and the South Foreland.
3. Hora diei circiter quarta, i. e. about ten o’eloek in the foro-^Q noon.
6. Angustis, “ steep.” Andrews says, the words following seem to imply that the mountains are called angusti because the space between them and the sea was narrow.
7 • Egrediendum, scii. navibus, “ for disembarking.”
Horam nonam, i. e. three o’clock in the afternoon
Et quae, i. e. et ea quae.
Monuit .... administrarentur. Construe, monuitque (ut) amnes res administrarentur ab iis ad nutum et ad tempus (at a beck and in a moment) ut ratio militaris rei, (et) uf maxime maritimae res postularent, ut quae haberent, &c., “ as being things that had,” &c. Schneider and Schmitz enclose quae in brackets.
Sublatis ancboris, “ having weighed anchor.”
IT. Ltitore, L e. on a part of the eoast which was flat and not protected by hills.
19. Essedariis. The esseda or essedum (from the Celtic ess, a carriage) was the name of a chariot used especially in war by the Britons, Gauls, and Belgae, and also by the Germans. They seem to have had only two wheels. The essedarii were the warriors, who drove these chariots with extraordinary swiftness and skill. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom. Antiq. p. 420. Dionysius Vossius, in a note on this passage^ (quoted by Barker,) says: “ I have often wondered that Caesar, throughout these Commentaries, has made no mention of the Gallic or British falcati currus. Hence I fully believe in the propriety of
21
Digitized by v^ooQleNOTES.
N»
*79 the remark formerly made by Amnios Pollio, that Caesar would have most probably altered many passages, if he had lived longer; more particularly as Frontinus, Strategem. 2, 3, expressly sayB: C. Caesar Gallorum falcatas quadrigas eadem ratione palis defixis excepit, inhibuitque. We can scarcely doubt that these words were taken from the Ephemerides of Caesar.”
22* In alto, m. mart, “ in the open sea.”
24. Armorum onere* Cf. note, p. 48, line 17.
2T. Omnibus membris expediti, “ having the free use of all their limbs.”
28* Insuefactos, i. e. accustomed to go into the water, and used to this species of warfare.
31 •	itebantur. Oudendorp reads utebantur.
33* Inusitatior. The Britons it seems were accustomed only to the vessels of burden, and not to the galleys of war.
33« Iiatus apertum, i. e. the unprotected side or wing of the enemy.
36. Tormentis* The tormenta were engines used in discharging darts and stones.
39. Paulum modo, “ only a little.” gQ 2* Aquilam. This was the common standard of the legion. It was made of silver or bronze, and with expanded wings. The pole on which it was fixed had at its lower extremity an iron point (cuspis) so that it could be thrust into the ground, and the aquilifer could, if need be, repel an attack. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom, Antiq. p. 896. It was considered the height of disgrace to lose the eagle.—Contee- tatus = comprecatus or precatus.
3. Praestitero. The future to which this future perfect relates is not expressed, “ I shall have performed my duty when you have done this.” (Andrews.) See Z. § 511.
Ordines, i. e. the lines formed by the soldiers when drawn up in battle array.
Alius, &c., “ one from one ship and another from another joined whatever standard he had happened to meet with,”.&c.
In universos, i. e. when they saw the whole body of a ship’s crew come out, they threw their darts among them.
Speculatoria navigia = “ spy boats,” i. e. boats for observation and reconnoitring the coasts.
Simul, L e. simul ac, “ as soon as.”
24. Equites, scil. Romani. These had embarked on board the eighteen transports, but had not been able to keep their course and reach the island.—Capere = attingere. See cap. 36 j Book V. 8.
23« Pristinam fortunam, i, e. the good luck or success which he had hitherto enjoyed.
Supra demonstraveram. See cap. 21.
Oratoris modo, “in the character of an ambassador.” Orator is often used in this sense.
Digitized by243
Page
Ejus l*el, referring to the detention and imprisonment -of Com-gQ mins.—Contulerunt, “ charged or laid.”
Continentem, i. e. Gaul.
Ignoscere, scil. se.
Illi, L e. Britanni.
2* In agros Jusserunt.	The chiefs directed the people to return
home, to the places where they usually lived, since the war was now over.
6, Post diem quartum quam, i. e. die quarto poet quam. The Romans in counting days included both the one from which they started and the one down to which they reckoned; hence, only two days had elapsed after Caesar’s arrival in Britain when the eighteen ships set sail. (Schmitz.)
6. Est ventum, scil. ab Romanis.
7 • Sustulerant, Tollere is here used in the sense of “ taking in a cargo.”
IO,	Cursum tenere, “ to hold on its course.”
Magno sui cum periculo, instead of magno suo cum periculo.
Dejicerentur, K were driven downward,” i. e. to the southern and westerly shore of the island.—Tamen here refers to quamvis, understood ; viz. although the storm was vehement, yet they cast anchor, in the hope that the wind would subside.
Xecessario .... provectae, “ through necessity, in an unfavorable night, having put to sea.”
16, Iiuna plena. Compare note above, p. 78, line 39. The full moon occurred in the night between the 30th and 31st of August, B. C. 55.
Id = “ this circumstance” of the effect of the full nioon upon the tides of the ocean.
Afflictabat, “ dashed together, shattered,” &c.
Administrandi, “ of managing them.”
CLuod omnibus constabat, “ because it was evident to all,” it was understood by all that they were to winter in Gaul.
His in locis, i. e. Britain.
Hoc = propter hoc or hanc ob rem. So the etiam following is the same as “ still.”
Rebellione, See Ramsh. 324.
3f. Rem producere, “protract the affair,” i. e. prolong the contest or war.
38. Reditu intercldsls, «being prevented from returning,” i. e. to Gaul.
2. Ex agris deducere. Compare end of cap. 27, remigrate in agros. g2
4, Ex eventu navium suarum, “ from what had happened to his ships.”
Aere. The aes	of	the ancients was a composition in
which copper was the predominant ingredient It answers to what is now termed " bronze,” which is composed of copper and tin. “ Brass” is
Google244
82* mixture of copper and zinc. See Anthon’s Smith’s Dicty. of Greek and Rom, Antiq. p. 29.
ltf. Interposita, i. e. between the day on which the Britons had surrendered and the present moment—Hominum, scH. Britannorum,
IT. In statione, “ on guard.”
IB. Id quod erat, “what was reaHy the case.”
Cohortes. A cohort was stationed or on guard at each gate of the camp. See Book VI. 37. Respecting the Roman camp, see note, p. 18, line 24.
Conferta legione, “ die legion being crowded close together.”
Essedis. See note, p. 79, line 19.
Perequitant. Schmitz remarks that from.this passage it is evident that equitare not only signifies “ to ride on horseback,” but also “ to • ride in a chariot”—Terrore equorum, an objective genitive, “by the fear or terror which the horses caused,” L e. among the cavalry of their opponents.
Aurigae. These were the drivers of the chariots, and were held inferior to the essedarii or warriors who fonght from them.
Illi, i. e. the essedarii,
39. Mobilitatem, “ agility.”	*
gg 1. Praestant, “ they exhibit”
Incitatos equos sustinere, “ to check their horses when at full gallop.”
Brevi, scil. tempore,
6« Perturbatis nostris, ablat absol. It may also be taken as a dat depending on auxilium tulit,.but not so well.
9« Lacessendum . .. proelium. Scaliger and Clarke insert hostem after lacessendum, but Without authority from MSS. Oudendorp shows that lacessere pugnam or proelium is both correct and an elegant Latin phrase. See his note, in Joe,
12m Ctui .... discesserunt, i. e. the Britons who had been left behind in the oountry. See cap. 32.
Reliqui = relictu
duae contains the idea of ut; viz. tantae tempestates, ut; hence the subjunctives continerent and prohiberent. (Schmitz.)
16. Suls, “ to their countrymen.”
' 19. His rebus, “by these means.”
Ante dictum est. See cap. 21 and 27.
duos .... potuerunt, i. e. they pursued them as far as their strength enabled them to run.
Afflictis, “demolished, prostrated,” &c. Clarke has aedificiis before afflictis,
Antea. See cap. 27.
Aequinoctii, i. e. the autumnal equinox. Cf. note, p. 78, line 39l 35m Subjiciendam. The verb means, to expose to the power or
influence of seme one.
Google

























BOOK FIFTH
SYNOPSIS.
Caesar made extensive preparations for a second expedition into Britain, and after being engaged for a time in suppressing the incursions of the Pirustae and the insurrection of the Treviri, he assembled a body of Gallic cavalry and set sail for the island. The naval equipment consisted of more than 800 vessels of all orders, and the military force amounted to five legions and 2,000 cavalry. The Britons terrified, fled for refuge to the woods.
Having fortified a camp on the coast, and left a few troops to protect the shipping, Caesar pursued the enemy within the forests, forced their intrenchments there, and his army was in full pursuit of them, when a party of horse arrived from his admiral with the intelligence, that in a sudden tempest many of his ships had been lost, and the greater part had sustained serious damage.
On his return, he found that the loss amounted to about forty vessels. By daily and nightly exertion on the part of his soldiers, he, in the space of ten days, had the rest hauled up close to his camp, and rendered them secure by extending the fortifications so as to enclose them. Prompt measures were adopted for the repair of these, and for the construction of others on the coast of Gaul. During this interval, Caesar was employed in collecting information in reference to the statistics of the country, its position and extent, and the origin and peculiarities of its various inhabitants.
The chief command of the Britons was conferred on Cassivellaunus, the leader in highest repute among them; and, from their desultory mode of fighting, Caesar now met with the same difficulties that he had experienced in his first encounter with these tribes. Their rapidity in charging and retreating, disappointed the efforts of his heavy-armed legions, while parties of the cavalry were diverted to a distance, and overpowered by the enemy. At length, by their rashness, having committed themselves to a disadvantageous position, the Britons sustained a severe reverse, and shortly after, all abandoned Cassivellaunus, save four thousand charioteers. The Romans, crossing the Thames, entered his territories, and took by assault his principal encampment.
In this situation of his affairs, the British chief made proposals for peace. These were readily accepted ; for, as Caesar suspected that fresh insurrections were on the eve of breaking out in Gaul, he deemed it expedient that his troops should go into winter-quarters on the Continent.
A scarcity of provisions obliged Caesar to distribute his army among the several states, in consequence of which the whole country was up in arms. The Eburones massacred the troops under the command of Titurius Sabinus, and, joining with the Nervii, besieged the quarters of Q. Cicero, the brother of the famous orator. After a brave defence he was relieved by Caesar, who was occupied the whole winter in Gaul in watching and suppressing various insurrections.
The Treviri, under command of Indutiomarus, prepare for war. and venture to attack the camp of Labienus. In a sally from the camp, Indutiomarus is slain, and the Gauls dispersed ; the country generally becomes more composed.
Digitized by Google247
1 • D. Domitio .... Coss., i. e. in the year B. C. 54. Of course OK Caesar left his winter-quarters some time after the first of January, as0t^ that was the date on which the consuls for the year entered upon their office.
2• Italiam, i. e. the northern part of Italy, termed Hither or Cisalpine Gaul, which formed part of his province.
6. Subductiones, “ drawing them on shore.” This was necessary to facilitate the loading of them. During the winter, and whenever ships were not in use, they were drawn on the beach, (subducere naves.) The opposite to this was, deducere naves, drawing them down into the water, launching them.
T. Nostro marl, i. e. the Mediterranean.—Id, scii, facit.
Actuarias. These were light transports, moved by oars and sails. They usually had but one bank of oars, and never more than two.
13. Conventibus. See note, p. 40, line 8.
Illyricum. This was also in Caesar’s province.	gg
Pirustae. These inhabited a part of the modern Tyrol, and had
invaded the part of Illyricum nearest to their own country.	•
6. Demonstrant. The indicative is here used, though doceant precedes, to indicate the fact that the Pirustae through their ambassadors show. (Schmitz.)
Civitatem, M the whole nation.”
11. Litem, “the damage” which the Pirustae had done the province. Lis is not only the trial, but also denotes all the expenses connected with it, and the fines that may be imposed.
IT. Cujus, viz. generis naves. The naves actuariae are meant.
See cap. 1.
Deduci. See note, p. 85, line 6.
Itium. Prof. Long, following Dr. Halley, takes the port Itius to be either Ambleteuse or Calais. D’Anville, after Du Cange, thought that Itius was Wissan or Wit-sand. (See Classical Museum, vol. IV. pp. 277, 278.)
Huic rei, viz. transmissui.
Supra demonstravimus. See Bk. II. 24; III. 11.
Alter, L e. Cingetorix.
3T. Arducnnam. The forest so termed extended from the Rhine as far as the mouth of the Meuse and Schelde. Cf. Bk. VI. 29, 33. A portion of it still exists, bearing the name of the Ardenne forest.
Civitati consulere. With the dative, consulere means, to con- 87 suit, seek what is best for some one, take measures in his behalf; with the accusative, it signifies to consult with some one, i. e. ask his advice.
See Ramsh. 262 ; Arnold, Pr. Intr. 233.
6. Sese idcirco, &c A verb of saying is implied in the preceding statement.
Officio. The word frequently has the meaning of “ obedience,” comprising all that a person is bound to do by law or agreement.
Google248
gy 9« Plebs, the common people, as distinct from the nobility.—Labe- retur, might glide, slip, or fall off, i. e. from duty.
11. Fidel, meaning the honor and virtue which he believed to exist in Caesar.
Ab instituto consilio deterreret, “ deterred him from his projected undertaking,” viz. that of attacking the Romans.
92* Ejus, i. e. Cingetorix.—Tum .... arbitrabatur, “ he also imagined,” &c.
94» Id factum. This is explained by the clause suam gratiam, &c., the word factum being the general or abstract term, the real nature of which is, suam gratiam minui. The word qui contains the idea of quum, denoting cause, whence the subjunctive fuisset. (Schmitz.)
2T. Hoc dolore, “ by this affront.”
99. Meldis. They probably inhabited the country near the Sequana or Seine, and the Matrona or Marne.
39. Antea dictum est. See Bk. 1. 3.—In primis, “above all others.”
gg* 1. Cupidum imperii, an instance of anaphora, or the repetition of a word at the beginning of successive clauses.
Magni animi, scii. esse.
Neque. It here introduces a natural consequence of that which precedes. So, often, et and atque. See Bk. VII. 30.
Religionibus. Perhaps because he pretended that the omens or auspices were adverse to him. So Pharnaces, ap. Hirt. B. Alex. 74, Auspiciis et religionibus inductus—descendere praerupta valle coepit This interpretation is the more likely, because among the Gauls were prophets, who bid TS rfiS oitovotncoirlas Kal bid rijs ruv lepduiv dualas, rd /xiWovra npoXf- yovrt, sal wdv rb nXfidos ixovvlv im/jKoov, Diod. S. 5, p. 380, Rhod.—So also Rhellicanus and Glandorpius understand the passage, while Hotomann, with less propriety, refers it to the performance of a vow, or of funeral rites. Sueton. Cues. 86, Ideoque et quae religiones monereut, et quae renuntiarent amici, neglexisse; 59, Ne religione quidem ulla a quoquam incepto absterritus. See also Livy, i. 31. (Davies and Oudendorp.)
13. Territare, a descriptive infinitive, or (as called by others) an historical infinitive.—Fieri. This infinitive depends upon a verb of saying, implied in metu territare.
16. Fidem interponere, “ he pledged his honor.”
IT. Ex usu, “ useful.”
23. Amentiam. See Ramsh. 72.—Prospiciendum, &c. The order is prospiciendum esse (Caesari) ne (Dumnorix) posset nocere quid sib* (i. e. Caesari) ac Reipublicae.
Corus ventus, or caurus ventus. “Hie northwest wind,” which began to blow in the Atlantic about the summer solstice, and continued till the end of autumn.
2T. Dabat operam, “ he took measures.”
Impeditis, “ occupied/* The preparation for the voyage caused
Digitized by Google249
Pag»
the vigilance with which Dumnorix was observed to be somewhat re- gg laxed.
Hunc, i. e. Dumnorix.—Se, i. e. Caesar.
Pro sano, “ as became a sound-minded or prudent man.55 Pro is here equivalent in meaning to tanquam.—Praesentes, scil. sui.
3 T. Enim. Davies says enim is here an affirmative particle, put for enim vero. Tacitus uses it in the same way, Plautus and others very often.
T • Pari numero, i. e. two thousand.	g0
Africo. This was a southwest wind, so termed as blowing from Africa.
Britanniam. Schmitz thinks that the point of Britain here alluded to was probably the isle of Thanet.
Commutationem. This change of tide must have been the beginning of the rise of the water.
14. Virtus = “ courage and perseverance.” Caesar is praising their patience and endurance in rowing.
IT. Omnibus navibus, scil. cum.
Annotinis. The word means “ of only one year.” It here refers to the ships built within the preceding year.
21> Sui coinmodi, scil. causa.
Cohortibus decem. This was the full complement of a legion.
See note, p. 16, line 18.
2T. Vigilia. See note, p. 18, line 23.
28* Eo minus veritus navibus. Davies notes this as a somewhat unusual phrase. He refers to Cicero, Acad. 4, 45, for a similar expression.
—In litore molli atque aperto, “ on a smooth and open shore.” The litus molle is a gently, gradually sloping shore or coast; the term apertum applied to litus indicates its freedom from rocks and promontories.
Essedis. Cf. note, p. 79, line 19.—Flumen, probably the river Stour, somewhat below Canterbury.
36. Crebris .... succisis. They appear to have been placed together in the form of an abattis or breastwork. The Gauls and Britons do not seem to have made use of other fortifications to any extent, if at all.
3 9. Testudine. See note, p. 44, line 7.—Aggere .... adjecto. See note, p. 46, line 31. Jaci is properly applied to the throwing up a mound; agi, to the erecting a tower.
6. Milites as pedites, ** the foot or infantry.”	QQ
Superiore nocte, “ on the preceding night.”
In litore. The ablative indicates that they were not only thrown upon the coast, but were still lying there, wrecked and scattered round.
Subsisterent .... possent. The verbs here retain the tense of the oratio directa, instead of the pluperfect required by the oratio obliqua; the writer putting himself in the place of the narrator. (Andrews.)
See Z. $ 525. Subsistere, with acc. is “ to hold out against.”
Coram perspicit = “ he sees with his own eyes.”
Digitized by Google250
r«**
10. Tamen, referring to quamvis, implied in amissis navibus.— Magno negotio, “ with great trouble.”
Fabros* Each legion had a certain number of fabri, “ artificers,” who worked in wood, iron, &c.
21* Posset* The imperfect subjunctive is here used instead of possit, because the leading verb scribit is an historical present for scripsit. (Schmitz.)
24* Subduci* Cf. note, p. 86, line 6.
30* Summa .... administrandi, “ the supreme command and direction of the war.”
33* Tamesis, the Thames. The territory of Gassivellauuus was north of the Thames, and the place where Caesar met him was eighty miles from the point where he had landed his troops. • It cannot refer to the mouth of the river, since Caesar knew nothing of its course.
34* Continentia, “ continual or uninterrupted.” See Bk. III. 28.
3T* Natos in insula Ipsa = “ whose ancestors sprung from Britain itself.” There is a similar expression in Thuc. 1,	yoifv 'Am^» Svdpub-
wot tpxovv ol ahroi del, Schol. r<p yivtt 6rj\ov6ri, oh yap faav iOdvarot. The most ancient nations thought themselves ahrdxdovag, because having long dwelt in the same country, they at length forgot their origin. (Davies.)
38* Memoria* The dative is more common. The ablative signifies the manner in which the tradition had been handed down.
1* Civitatum .... quibus ex civitatibus* This repetition has been frequently noticed before. Caesar often uses it
2* Bello illato, L e. when the war was finished.
3* Aere* See note, p. 82, line 8.—Taleis. These were thin or small staves. Being properly of wood,/erret* is added, to show that those used for money were of this latter substance. It is plafn from this that the Britons had no coinage, but, like the early Romans, determined the value of pieces of metal by their weight
T* Plumbum album, i. e. tin, the wawlrtpos of the Greeks. The mines are in Cornwall, the southwestern part of England. Hence Caesar is wrong in asserting that it is found in the interior.
9* Materia, wood, i. e. trees.
I* Animi .... causa, “ for the sake of amusement and pleasure.”
12* IiOca* This, like aer and coelum, may be rendered by “ climate.” (Schmitz*)
14* Insula natura triquetra* From this (generally) accurate description of Britain some writers collected that these Commentaries were not the production of Caesar, because it was not ascertained till the reign of Claudius that Britain was an island. See Dio, 39, p. 114; see also Tacit Agr. 18. But Caesar obtained this information from report, and also what he sayB about the Britons in the interior of the island ; for he never penetrated into the interior, and hence Pomponius Mela, 3, €, congratulates Claudius that Britain had been at length discovered. (Davies.) •251
Pice
Cantium, the present county of Kent.	91
IT. Circiter millia passuum D, “about five hundred miles.**
Measuring in a straight line from Bolerium Promontorium (Land’s End) to Cantium Promontorium, (North Foreland,) the distance does not exceed three hundred and forty-four British, or three hundred and fifty-six Roman miles: if Caesar included the irregularities of the coast, the measurement would be greatly enlarged.
Ad Hispaniam. This is quite out of the way, since Spain lies to the south and not the west of Britain.
22• Mona, * the Isle of Man.” Some say that Anglesea is meant.
23, Objectae, scil. esse.
24:. Bruma, “ the wintor solstice.” It is, perhaps, a contraction of brcvissuma, viz. dies. (Schmitz.) The statement here made has, of course, no foundation.
Ex aqua mensuris, measurements made by water, i. e. by means of the clepsydra, or an hourglass filled with water. See Anthon’s Smith’s Piety, of Greek and Rom. Antiq. pp. 508-510.
27 • DCC millium. This is about ninety Roman miles too much. The western coast is 590 (= 610 Roman) miles.
30. Millia passuum DCCC. Caesar's estimate here, too, is too large. The exact length is 550 miles, or about 570 Roman miles.
Se vitro inficiunt, “paint themselves with woad.” Vitrum is the herb woad, used for dyeing a blue color. The ancients also called it glastum, and modern botanists call it isatis Unctoria. It seems to have produced a greenish or bluish color. The verb injiciunt denotes that the dye was applied not only to the surface of the skin, but penetrated it, and thus caused the dye to appear like the natural color of the skin. (Schmitz.)*
Horridiore. The term horridus, as Oudendorp remarks, is generally applied to shaggy bristles, thick leaves, squalid hair, and foul beards. It is also applied to other things, as horrida tempestas, verba, horridus clamor, &c.
Capillo sunt promisso, “ they have long hair.”
1. Uxores, &c. The order is, deni duodenique (Britanni) habentQ2 uxores communes inter se.
4:. Q,uo, i. e. ad quos, or in quorum domos. Deducere is to lead a bride home.
T • Tamen ut, i. e. ita tamen ut.
Cupidius = “ too eagerly.”
Spatio, viz. temporis, “ after the lapse of some time.”
15. Primis. The first cohorts of a legion were generally distinguished for bravery, being equivalent to picked troops.
IT. Per medios, scil. nostros.
Illi, i. e. hostes.—Submissis, others read immissis.
22. Pro = ante or ante frontem, “ in front of,” as often elsewhere.
Illi, referring to the Britons.
Cederent, “ retreated, fell back,” &c.
Google252
i*«f
28. Dispart proelio, m unequal eombat, i. «. with great advantage
on their aide.
Proelii ratio, scii. Britannorum. The mode of fighting used by the British cavalry was full of danger to the Romans, whether they retreated or pursued.
31« Rnri, “ scattered here and there/*
Dispositas haberent, i. e. stationed in diderent places and at
certain intervals.
33« Exciperent = “relieved”
36. Lenius, i. e. with less eagerness or readiness.
C. Trebonio. Trebonius was one of Caesar’s lieutenants, and subsequently received many favors at his hands. Notwithstanding, however, lie joined with the conspirators who succeeded in assassinating Caesar.
2. Non absisterent, “did not keep at a distance from,” i. e. ap
proached close up to.
Q,uoad = “ until.”
Ex. The preposition signifies “ in consequence ofhence also, “immediately after,” which is hero clearly signified by protinus. (Schmitz.)
Summis copiis = omnibus copiis, “ with all their forces.” They never after this ventured to come to a general engagement.
Transiri potest. According to Dr. Schmitz, the place where Caesar and his army forded the Thames, is commonly believed to be at Cowey Stakes, near Oats!and, and not far from the confluence of the Wey. Venerable Bede, who flourished in the eighth century, speaks of the stakes which the Britons fixed in the river, as being visible there in his day. Consult the interesting article of Prof. Long, on “ the British Expeditions of C. Julius Caesar,” Classical Museum, vol. iv. p. 281.
Animadvertit. Oudendorp reads animum advertit, as tho preferable form.
Sudibus, &c. See note above, line 13.
Ctuura .... exstarent, “ though they (the soldiers) were above the water with the head only,” i. c. though their heads only were above water.
Dimitterent, “ relinquished or abandoned.”
Supra demonstravimus. See cap. 17.
Contentionis, i. e. of the success of a struggle with the Romans for supremacy.
Servabat. The verb means “ to watch closely.” It is here equivalent to observabat, for which, as Oudendorp observes, it is frequently found.
Ex via, i. e. out of the public or frequented roads.—Impeditis, intricate, difficult of access.
Magno .... equitum, “ with great danger to our cavalry.”
Relinquebatur, “it remained.”
Google253
34* Discedi» scii, ab equitibus or militibus, “ the cavalry, or soldiers, 00
to depart.”
38. Trinobantes. They inhabited the modern county of Essex. Their capita], Camulodunum, was the present town of Colchester.
Venerat. See Book IV. 21.	94
Petunt ut (Caesar) defendat, &c. They beg Caesar io espouse their cause, and to send Mandubratius into the state to govern it.
Q,ui praesit, i. e. ut ille praesit.
Numerum, supply constitutum, i. o. to the amount required of them.
Militum, subjective genitive == “from all injury which the soldiers might inflict upon them.”
14. Oppidum. It is impossible even to conjecture where this town was situate. In fact the course of Caesar north of the Thames cannot be traced with any approach to certainty.
19. Locum, i. e. the oppidum just spoken of. Some read lucum, which Oudendorp says is not an inelegant lection.
526. Ad marc = on the sea-coast. See cap. 13.
29. Castra navalia. See cap. 11. When the Romans were in a hostile country, where there were no good or proper harbors, they used to draw their vessels upon shore, and construct fortifications about them. This was done more especially when they expected to pass the winter in an enemy’s country.
3T. Extrahi, i. e. cunctando perdi: extrahere signifying “ to spend time in inactivity, and for no other purpose than to get over it.” (Schmitz.)
38. Q,uid vectigalis, “how much tribute.” This tribute, however, was not paid till at a later period when Britain became a province under the emperors.
1. Interdicit atque imperat. These two words, the one of which 95 is negative and the other positive, express Caesar’s command in the strongest way, indicating both what he wished to be done and what he wished not to be done. The clauso which follows with ne, however, has reference only to interdicit. (Schmitz.)
4. Deductis, “ being launched;” ad mare is understood.
6. Commeatus, “ the act of going,” i. e. the voyage across tne channel, the transportation, &c. Caesar appears to have left Britain about the 25th of September.
Desideraretur, “ was lost or missing.”
Prioris commeatus, “of the former convoy.”
12* Locum caperent = “ reached the destined placo.”
Solvisset. Supply anchoras or naves.
Subductis, scii, in aridum, “ being drawn on shore.”—Samarobrivae. Dr. Schmitz says it is the modern town of Amiens on the river Samara, (Sambro,) from which the uncient name of the town is derived.
22
Google254
N»
Anguftttas provenerat, “ had been produced more scantily (than usual.)”
23« Q. Ciceroni, the brother of M. Tullius Cicero, the famous orator..
Essuos. Their locality is entirely unknown; it is supposed to have been in some part of Normandy.
20« Belgio, Belgium, apart of the country inhabited by the Belgae. It comprised the districts of the Bellovaci, Atrebates, and Ambiani. See cap. 46 ; compare Book 11.4. (Schmitz.)—Quaestorem. See note, p. 38, line 39.
30« Cativolci. See cap. 26; Book VI. 31.
Mederi, “ remedy.”
Quoad .... cognovisset, i. e. until he should have learned that the winter-quarters were properly established and fortified.
1. Summo loeo, i. e. summo generet of a very high or noble family. Hence locus is also used in the sense of rank or dignity*
3. Hunc .... eum. The reading here is various. Some omit eum; in that case hunc refers to TaSgetius. As it stands in the text we have followed, hunc refers to annum. Oudendorp omits palam after inimici, and inserts it after multis. His note on the passage is worthy of being consulted.
ft. Inimici. See Ramsb. 35 ; Crombie, p. 168. Inimicus is a private enemy; hostis, an avowed or public enemy.
Ad plures pertinebat, i. e. more persons than one were concerned in it; many were concerned in it
14. Hibernis, the dative, denoting the object for which the place was destined. Cf. Book VII. 15.
13. Diebus eirciter quindecim, quibus, “ about fifteen days after.” See A. and S. § 253, Rem. 1.
Ambiorige et Cativolco. See cap. 24.
Praesto fuissent. Ambiorix and Cativolcus had met Sabinus and Cotta on the confines of their kingdom, had supplied them with provisions, &c., as testimonials of respect and friendship.
20. Magna manu, soil, cum.
27• Minui posse, “ could be adjusted.”
Titurii, i. e. Titurius Sabinus.
Missu Caesaris = mittente Caesare. See Book VI. 7.
Plurimum ei debere, “ that he owed very much to himthat he was under very great obligations to him.
Stipendio liberatus esset, “he had been freed from the payment of tribute.”
39. Imperia, i. e. the rights and powers which appertained to him as
king.
gj 1. Multitudo, i. e. the people in general. These had no less power over him than he had over them. It would hence seem that the government of many of the Gallic states was a mixture of aristocracy and democracy.
Google255
Pa*«
3« Humilitate, “weakness.” ''Humilitas is the opposite of potestas. Q'J
T. Alterae, on hid form foralt&i. We sometimes also find altero in thh dative for alteri. See Book VII. 25.
Pietate. This word comprises all the duties which a man has to perform towards God, his parents, friends, and his country. Here it refers more especiaHy to the duties he owed to his country. (Schmitz.)
Habere .... officii, “ he had now regard to .the claims of duty.”
12« Hospitio. See note, p. 37, line 12.
14. Ipsorum esse consilium, “ that it was for them (the legates, Titurius and Cotta) to consider and determine whether,” &c.
Ctuod quum faciat, &c., “ that in doing this, he was both consulting the good of his own state in freeing it from the burden of winter- quarters, and was making a grateful return for the favors he had received from Caesar.”
*9. Exsistit, “ arises.”
Ctuantasvis magnas, a pleonastic expression The common form of speech is quantumvis magnas or quantasvis copias. Similar pleonasms not infrequently occur: they serve to render the expression emphatic; “ if the forces of the Germans were ever so great.”
Docebant = demonstrabant.
Multis . . r. illatis. The meaning is, they (the Romans) without being commanded by Caesar {ultro) had bravely held out against the enemy, and wounded many of them. (Schmitz.)
Premi, viz. se.
laevius aut turpius, “ more thoughtless or disgraceful.”—Auctore hoste, an enemy being the author of the steps they were about to take.
1. Sero, “too late.”	9g
3. Arbitrari, scil. se. Schmitz supplies hostes or Gallos.—Aliter, j. e. unless Caesar had gone.
T. Ille, i. e. Caesar.
8w Spectare, scil. se, “ that he did not look to the enemy, but to the fact itself, for his authority.”
Subesae, “was near.”—Ariovisti mortem. See Book 1.53. It honce appeare that Ariovistus died soon after bis Right across the Rhine.
Ardere, “ was burning” with resentment against the Romans.
11 • Redactam, i. e. se esse.
13. Slue certa re, “ without accurate information,” or without a certain and substantial reason.
Iff* Si nil sit durius, i. e. si nil gravius acciderit, “ if nothing extraordinary, or no uncommon misfortune, happened.”
IT. Unam salutem, “their only safety.”
Praesens, “immediate.”
Longinqua « diuturna, “ long or ptotracted.”
22« Prlmisque ordinibus. See note, p. 32, line 9; p. 51, line 26. The centurions of the- fiat orders are here meante Vincite, “ prevail or carry your opinion, if you wish it”
Google256
Page
Qg 24. Ctul terrear» i. e. neque talis sum ut terrear.
Hi sapient, &c., “ these (the soldiers standing near) shall know it, and if any calamity happen* they will demand satisfaction of you,
28• Casum = eventum. The idea of an unfortunate event or issue of the war is implied in the expression.
30* Comprehendunt utrumque» “ they (L e. the officers) embrace both,” i. e. Titurius and Cotta. Comprehendere commonly meaus* to seize or arrest.
36. Dat.... manus* The words dare manus indicate a symbolic action, expressing that a person surrenders his independence, or owns that he is conquered. See Corn. Nepos, Hamilc. 1; Cic. De Amtc. 26.
36« Prommciatur ... ituros, “ orders are given to march at break of day.”
38* Instrumento* The term is here collective, and refers to the utensils, furniture^ provisions, &c., required in a stationary camp.
Qg 1* Excogitantur, viz. a militibus, for Caesar is here describing the thoughts and reflections that passed through the minds of the soldiers. (Schmitz.) Others give a different turn to the passage, which has been much controverted.
3* Ut quibus = quasi iis,“ as if they,” &c. See cap. 33.
8* De profectione eorum senserunt, “ they became aware of their departure.”
Convallem. The word means a place shut in between two hills, whereas vallis is the low ground at the foot of a hill; but this difference is not always strictly observed. (Schmitz.)
12* Demisisset, “ had descended.”
18* In ipso negotio, “ at the very moment of action.”
19. Q,ui cogitasset, &c. Supply ut. See A. and S. § 264, 8.
21* Auctor, “adviser.”
22« Appellandis* The verb is here equivalent to alloqui, “ to address.”
Possent, i. e. Titurius and Cotta.—Jusserunt pronuntiare, “they (the commanders) ordered the officers (L e. the oenturions) to announce to their men.” See cap. 34.
26. Orbem. See note, p. 84, line 6.
28* Incommode accidit, “ turned out disadvantageous^.”
29* Q,uod .... videbatur, “ because it was evident”
Abripere. Oudendorp prefers this to the reading in some edi- - tions, arripere. They not only seized bat carried away th<?things which they regarded as most valuable. The MSS; continually confound these two words.
33. Consilium, “ judgment, presence of mind,” &c.
Illorum, i. e. the Gauls.
39* Erant.... nostri, “our men, both in valor and numbers, were a match for them in fighting.” Caesar does not mean to say that the
Digitized by Google257
Romans equalled the enemy in numbers, bat that in consequence of their ()() valor the number which they had was sufficient to enable them to make a stand against the barbarians. Oudendorp and others place a colon after pores, and connect nostri with what foHows. In that case the clause refers to the Eburones, who by their valor and numbers were able to cope with the Homans.
1« Ab duce, i. e. Caesar.	100
Pronunciari, “ to be proclaimed.”
T. Nihil.... posse, “ that it was not possible to hurt them they ran no risk in so doing, because the lightness of their armor and their daily exercise gave them every advantage over the Romans.
Recipientes, scil. Romanos.
Earn partem, i. e. of the Roman army.
Ab latere aperto, “ on the open flank.”
Horam octavam, i. e. about two o’clock in the afternoon.
Primum pilum. See note, p. 51, line 26. *He had held the
office of chief centurion of the legion.
24» Subvenit. On the meaning of this verb and its synonyms, see Arnold, Pr. Intr. 222.
In is here used with the accusative, because the verb vulnerare implies the idea of aiming at, or throwing a missile at a person.
Ille, i. e. Ambiorix.—Appellatus. See note, p. 99, line 22.
Ipsi .... iri, “ that no injury should be done to him,” i. e. he, Titurius, should personally be safe, however it might be with regard to the soldiers.
Interponere, “pledged.”—Ille, i. e. Titurius.
Constitit, i. e. perstitit, “ he persisted” in his determination not to go to an enemy in arms against the Romans.
Victoriam conclamant, i. e. conclamant victoriam partam esse. JQJ
Aquilifer, the officer who bore the eagle or standard of the legion.
Cf. note, p. 80, line 2.
11. Illi, i. e. those who had taken refuge in the camp.
IT. Sublatus, “ elated.”
Re demonstrata, i. e. after he had informed them of his recent victory and had explained his present intentions.
Magnam partem exercitus interisse. This appears to have been a greater loss than was ever sustained by Caesar in any of hi» battles. The whole number of soldiers was about seven thousand.
Nihil esse negotii, “ that it was an enterprise of no difficulty.”
Centrones, &c. These tribes were clients or subjects of the
Nervii.' The districts they inhabited are unknown.
Huic, referring to Cicero.
33« Lignationis munitionisque causa, “ for the sake of obtaining wood and materials for the fortifications.”
38. Aegre .... sustentatur, i. e. aegre eo die milites sustentant hostium impetum.
22*
Google258
102	1 • Adepti, i. e. si hanc adepti essent victoriam, the participle adepti
having the meaning of a conditional clause. See Z. § 635, note 1.
Si pertulissent, i. e. the persons to whom the letters were intrusted. Schmitz pronounces the ellipsis to be rather bold, but says instances of a similar kind do now and then occur.
6* Turres. See note, p. 46, line 32.—Admodum, “about”—Excitantur. The verb excitare is here equivalent to erigere, as in Bk. II. 14, but it contains the notion of rapidity, which erigere does not.
Praeustae, “ burnt at the end.” Stakes of this sort were used in defending the rampart.—Muralium pilorum. These were the pili or lances which were hurled upon the besiegers from the walls. They were larger and heavier than those used in the field.
Turres contabulantur. The turres contabulatae were towers of several stories, from which stones were cast by means of engines.— Pinnae, a square kind of breastwork, round the top of a tower, behind which the soldiers were protected against the darts of the enemies. They seem to have been similar to the breastwork round the tops of Gothic towers. The pinnae alternated with loricae; that is, a kind of wickerwork serving a similar purpose as the pinnae. (Schmitz.)
IT. Tenuissima valetudine, “in very delicate or weak health.”
Ultro = “even.”
Vocibus, “entreaties.”
Egerat. See cap. 24.
Ambiorigem .... faciundae causa, i. e. they brought forward Ambiorix as a proof of the truth of what they said, and at the same time to intimidate Cicero.
2T. Eos, i. e. those with Cicero.—His, i. e. those in the different winter-quarters throughout Gaul.
Sese tamen, &c., “ nevertheless, that they entertained such feelings towards,” &c.
Consuetudinem, i. e. of establishing winter-quarters in Gaul.— Licere illis incolumibus. Respecting this attraction with licet and similar verbs, see Z. § 601.
Per se, i. e. as far as the Nervii were concerned.
36. Sperare. Supply se.—Justitia, “ clemency,” or “ compassion.” —Impetraturos. Supply eos esse.
T. Spe, i. e. the hope of persuading the Romans to leave their camp.
|03	1* Nulla .... copia, ablative absolute = quum nulla copia esset.
See Bk. II. 8 and 9.
3. Exhaurire. This verb can, properly speaking, be joined only to manibus, “ they took up the loose soil with their hands, and then carried it away in their military cloaks;” and to sagulis must be supplied a verb signifying “ to carry away.” This mode of speaking is called a zeugma. (Schmitz.)
Millium. Supply passuum. The account here given seems almost incredible.259
P*g9
7m Testudines* See note, p. 44, line 7-	103
IO* Glandes, These were balls of clay, which being in a moist or fluid state, were burnt, and while red-hot the balls were thrown by means of a sling {funda) among the tents of the enemy, to set them on fire.
Agere, “ to advance.”
19, Demigrandi, Vossius says demigrare is here used for deserere aut fugere castra.
Ut se .... dabant, “ as they had crowded in close to the rampart, and the hindmost prevented the foremost from retiring.”
Turri, meaning a moveable tower of the enemy’s.
Si introire, &c., i. e. they began to invite them to enter if they wished.
2. Ctui .... appropinquarent. Schmitz says that qui here contains the idea of quum; hence the subjunctive. They were now approaching the first ranks, or the honorable post of primipiluSy or chief centurion. See note, p. 51, line 26, and p. 32, line 9.
Loco, i. e. their rank or place in the army.
Hie, liic dies. This is Oberlin’s reading. Oudendorp has hie dies, hie dies.
Exanimato, “ deprived of life. ”	104
7• Transfigitur scutum Pulfioni. instead of the possessive and subjective genitive, a dative is sometimes used, as the remote object of a verb. See Bk. I. 31.
Conanti. See note on line 7.
Succurrit .... subvenit. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 222.
Ad hunc, i. e. Varenus.
Dejectus, “ driven back,” or “ repelled.”
Contentione et certamine. The former relates to the rivalry, or spirit of emulation, between the two men, the latter to their struggle with their enemies.
Versavit, i. e. fortune turned the scale sometimes towards one, sometimes towards the other.—Inimicus. See Ramsh. 35; Crombie
p. 168.
Unus Nervius, for quidam Nervius.—Intus, “within,” i. e. our camp.
Lioco honesto, “ of an honorable family.”
Suam .... praestiterat, “ and had given proofs of his fidelity to him.”—Servo, scil. suoj “ his slave.”
31, Effert. Supply e castris.
Hora circiter undecima, “about five o’clock in the afternoon.”
Crassum. See cap. 24.
3 8. Cum nuncio, i. e. as soon as he received the message of Caesar.
Q,ua, &c., “ where he knew he should have to pass.”
1* Reipublicae. The word is here used in the sense of “the com-JQ^ mon good,” or salus publica.NOTES.
Eac»
105 2• Facere posset, “ could do it”
Cogit, i. e. coagit or colligit, “he assembles.”
Hora tertia, “ nine o’clock in the morning.”
Samarobrivae. See note, p. 95, line 18.
IO.	Literas publicas. These consisted of the accounts of the army, dispatches, reports, and the like.
14. Veritus uc . . . . non posset. Dr. Schmitz remarks, that the two negatives ne and non in this sentence neutralize each other, and are therefore equivalent to ut. See Z. § 535.
IT. Remittit, “sends in retuni, or writes a reply.”
19. Equitatus peditatusque copias. Caesar uses the fuller form of expression than is common in other writers.
Opinione dejectus, “disappointed in his expectation.” Spe dejectus is the more usual expression.
Redierat = “ he had been reduced.”
Graecis literis. Critics are not agreed whether only Greek characters were used, or whether fhe letter was written in Greek. Schmitz thinks the latter more probable. See note, p. 26, line 14.
Monet, i. e. Gallicum equitem, to whom Caesar had given the letters.
38. Fumi incendiorum. Caesar’s custom was to burn the buildings of the enemy.
100 3. Armatorum = militum.—Data facultate, i. e. by Vertico’s beiug in the camp and the departure of the enemy.—Galium .... repetit, “ begs the Gaul again.”
Q,ui .... referat, “ to carry back.”
Convertisse, scil. se.
Turn. Schmitz regards this word as adding another reason to that contained *in the words erat magni, &c.
Eoque, “ and for this reason.”—Remittendum, scil. esse sibi.
18. Viarum. The viae here mentioned are the roads or passages in
the camp, between the divisions of troops. There were five lengthwise,
e. from the decuman to the praetorian side, and three crosswise. He made these as narrow and close together as he could, in order to get the camp in a small compass.
Ad aquam, i. e. near the river mentioned above, to which the soldiers had to go for water. The Romans usually pitched their camp near some stream of water.
Caesar. Supply exspectabat from the preceding clause.
Suum locum, i. e. the ground favorable for himself.
Portas obstrui. The blocking up of the gates was of course a mere pretence, so as to deceive the enemy.
Concursari .... agi, used impersonally. Concursare means, “ to run about here and there in confusion.”
Transducunt, i. e. across the valley and stream of water.
Digitized by Google201
3. Ea« Supply parte.—Vallum manu scindere, i. e. of course with XQ7 suitable instruments wielded by hand.
IO. Neque .... videbat. The reading and signification of this passage is much disputed. Prof. Anthon (following Oberlin) renders, “ and because he saw that their position was abandoned by the enemy with no small loss on their part.” Dr. Schmitz supposes the meaning to be, he saw that even if he were to abandon his position now (locum relinquere) the enemy had already sustained not an inconsiderable loss. Prof. Andrews agrees with this latter view.
Admiratur, “he is surprised at.”—Producta legione, i. e. for the purpose of being reviewed by Caesar.
Non decimum quemque, &c., i. e. there was not one soldier in ten without a wound.
 Culpa, “ by the misconduct.”—Sit acceptum.	See A. and S.
§ 266, 3, and 2, Rem. 2.—Hoc, “ on this account.”
Laetatio. The word does not occur anywhere except in this passage; but it is a very expressive word, and far better suited to this passage than the common word laetitia, for, being a verbal substantive, it expresses the act of rejoicing itself. (Schmitz.)
Eoque, i. e. the camp of Cicero.
Fieret. This subjunctive depends upon quo, which contains the idea of ut, viz. tantus clamor, ut eo clamore jieret.
3 T. Trinis hibernis. Trina hiberna are “ threefold winter-quarters;” distributive numerals being frequently used with plural nouns which have no singular, instead of cardinal numerals. See Z. § 115 and 119 (Schmitz.)
2. Ciuid reliqui consilii, “ what farther measures.”	io&
i\,uin, i. e. quo non, the quo referring to tempus.
Armoricae. These were several tribes, apparently those living in marshy and fertile districts near the sea, between the Seine and Loire.— Oppugnandi sui, i. e. L. Roscii.
19. Adventu, &c. At the time of Caesar’s arrival in Gaul Moritas- gus had been king.
Satisfaciendi. The verb here means “ to apologize.”
Tantum, &c., “so great an influence did it exercise among barbarous men that some were found,” &c.
Principes belli inferendi, i. e. the persons who first stir up a war.
2T. Attulit. The subject of attulit, as of valuit, is the clause esse repertos, &c.
28. Alteros .... alteros, “ the former .... the latter.”
Officiis = “services.”
Idque .... sit, i. e. “ I am even inclined to wonder at this.” The whole expression is a rhetorical one, stating in a doubtful manner that of which a person is perfectly convinced. (Schmitz.)
34. Deperdidisse. It depends upon dolebant. The words ejus
Google262
°P*n*on*9 are to be explained by se virtute belli praeferri.—A populo Romano, i. e. populi Romani.
»• Ariovisti bello. See Book I. 31, &c.—Tenchthero%pm transitu. See Book IV. 1, &o.
4. Lapsus = “ disappointed.”
Tota Gallia, i. e. in tota OaUia or per totam Galliam.
Conscientia facinoris. The Senones on account of the expulsion of Cavarinus, cap. 54, and the Camutes on account of the slaughter of Tasgetius, cap. 24.
Neque	defore, “ nor would there be wanting troops that of
their own accord would join him.”
Iff. Q,uo, i. e. ad quod concilium.
Supra demonstravimus. See cap. 3.
Bonaque qjus publicat, “ and confiscates his estates.”
Hue, i. e. into the country of the Senones and Camutes.
Maim, “ by art”
29. A Cingetorige* “from, i. e. by means of Cingetorix.”
Sub castris, “ below or close to the camp.”
Alias .... alias, i. e. “ sometimes .... sometimes.” The word alias seems to be a contraction for aliais, i. e. aliist and to be equivalent to alio tempore or alio loco. (Schmitz.)
Timoris opinionem. See cap. 49, where Caesar used the same stratagem against the Nervii.
Intromissis, “having been introduced” into the camp of Labienus.
no »• Arcessendos curaverat. The participle in dus often expresses the end or purpose for which a thing is done. This is especially the case after curare, verbs of giving, sending, &c. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 351; A. and S. § 274, Rem. 7.
Nulla ratione, “ in no way.”
Magna .... verborum, “ with very insulting language.”
7 • Ubi visum est, i. e. “ when it appeared to them to be time.”
Praecipit atque interdicit. The former word expresses a positive, the latter a negative command. See note, p. 95, Hne 1. Before petant (which belongs to praecipit) supply ut; the following neu .... vulneret refers to interdicit.
Proterritis hostibus, i. e. “so terrified as to be forced into a precipitate flight,” and therefore Caesar adds, Atque in fugam conjectis, agreeably to his habit of introducing Bynonyms, as in the words, dispersi dissipatique. (Oudendorp.)
Hominis, i. e. Labienus: “fortune favored Labienus’s plan.”
Fluminis, i. e. the Mosa or Meuse, winch separated the Trevhi from the Remi.
GoogleBOOK SIXTH
SYNOPSIS.
The death of Titurius Sabinus, and the slaughter of the troops under his command, gave rise to insurrections throughout the major part of Gaul. Caesu*, apprehending this result from the well-known fickleness and excitability of the Gallic tribes, augments his forces, as a necessary preparation for the ensuing campaign. He falls suddenly upon the Nervii and subdues them; his legate Labienus attacks and routs the Treviri; and the Senones and Carnutes are admitted to terms of peace.
In order to intimidate the Germans, who were about proceeding to the aid of the Gauls, he crosses the Rhine a second time; the Suevi retire before him, but Caesar, fearing the want of provisions, returns into Gaul.
He embraces the opportunity, in this part of his Commentaries, of giving a description of the manners, religion, Sac. of the Gauls and Germans. He also gives an account of the Hercynian forest, and the various kinds of wild animals found in it.
The remainder of the book details his operations in Gaul against Ambiorix and the Eburones. The former is overcome, and the territories of the latter are laid waste. The Sigambri, who, with others, had been invited to assist in plundering the Eburones, suddenly attack the camp of Cicero, throw the Romans into great consternation, succeed in cutting off a part of the troops sent to forage, and return with their booty over the Rhine.
The country of the Eburones having been completely wasted, Caesar holds a council of Gaul, and investigates the conspiracy of the Senones and Carnutes. Acco, their chief, is tried and executed; and the troops having been placed in winter-quarters, Caesar returns to Italy.
Faff*
3« Dilectum habere, “ to hold a levy,” i. e. to raise forces.	in
Proconsule. Pompey had been consul the year before, and was now proconsul. Accordingly he ought to have gone to Spain, which had been assigned to him as his province for five years. But he allowed his legates, Afranius and Petreius, to undertake the command in Spain, and remained in the neighborhood of Rome, for the ostensible purpose of seeing that the city should be provided with supplies of grain.—Ad urbem, i. e. near or in die neighborhood of Rome. No person vested with military command, (cum imperio,) was permitted by the laws of Rome to enter or remain in the city. The single exception was in the case of a triumph decreed by the senate, on which day a general was freed from this restriction.
3* Ctuos, i. e. militea quoa.
6« Consulis sacramento* This was the oath by which the soldiers swore allegiance and obedience to the consul. Rogare is the technical
Digitized by v^ooQle264
r»o
IU term for calling on a soldier to take the oath, hence it is here equivalent to “ to bind by an oath.” (Schmitz.) Pompey bad raised these troops during the preceding year.
Ad opinionem, “ in reference to the opinion which Gaul enter-
tamed,” &c.—Tanta*	facultate*, “ that the resources of Italy should
appear so great,” &c.
Brevi tempore sarciri. This is a legal term, signifying (“to repair damage”) “to make whole.” Festus: Sarcito in XII. Servius Sulpitius ait significare damnum solvito, praestato. Whence sartus for integer, and hence the form, sarta tecta conservare. (Vossius.) According to Davies, the metaphor is taken from those who repair the rents in garments. See Barker’s Caesar.
Q,uod, “ this request of Caesar.”
Adductis, i. e. ad Caesarem.
Cum a. Titurio. See Bk. V. 30-37.
112 * • Docuit, “ showed.”
Ut docuimus. See Bk. V. 58.
Inventis nonnullis civitatibus, scii, a quibus impetrare possent.
Confirmant, scii, se or animos suos.—Obsidibusque de pecunia cavent, i. e. “ and by hostages they took precaution to secure the sum of money which each state was to contribute.” The hostages were given as a pledge that the Treviri would pay to the states the promised sum. So, Bk. VII. 2, obsidibus cavere, where others wrongly insert de. Those critics erroneously thought that the sense would be the same in the expression cavere aliqua re, as in de aliqua re, whereas it is quite different, as in the well-known example, De illis testamento cavisset. So Terence, Eun. 4, 7, 12; Sibi cavit loco, i. e. per locum, quem elegit. (Ou- dendorp.)
11. Cisrhenanis. According to Davies, these were the Condrusi, Eburones, Caeraesi, and Paemani. See Bk. II. 4-
1 2. Ad imperatum, to perform what had been commanded.
22. Uti instituerat. This was Caesar’s annual practice. Cf. cap. 44.
Lutetiam Parisiorum, the modem city of Paris. In Caesar’s days it was a small town, situated on an islaud in the river Seine, and did not acquire any great importance until the time of the Frankish kings.
Hi, i. e. the Parisii.
Ab hoc concilio abfuisse, “to have had no concern in this plot or conspiracy.”
Suggestu. The suggestus or suggestum was an elevated place, formed of earth, stone, &c., from which speeches or addresses were delivered, and from which the president of an assembly pronounced his opinion or judgment.
Conantibus. Supply convenire.
Deprecandi, i. e. of excusing their acts, as appears from this, viz. that Caesar replies that he receives their excuse.
Digitized by Google26ft
36* Per Aeduos, i e. the Aedui were prevailed upon to interfere inJl^ their behalf with Caesar.
36* Petentibus Aeduis, ablative absolute, expressing cause.
Peragit, dissolves the assembly of the Gallic states.	113
Et mente et animo. See note, p. 64, line 35.
5« Cavarinum. See Bk. V. 54.
Iracundia. See Rarash. 585.—Odio civitatis. He seems to have become odious to the state because Caesar had made him king over it
Ctuod . . . habebat. The expression pro explorato aliquid habere means, M to believe a thing to be certain.’’
Ejus, i. e. Ambiorix.
14. Amicitiam, “ alliance.”—Illi, i. e. Ambiorix.
17 • Congredi, “ to join or form an alliance with.”—Cogeretur. In Caesar it signifies the same as necessitate coactus conaretur or niteretur, with which it is on this account more than once confounded. Compare the notes on Bk. V. 42 ; Manibus sugUlisque terram exhaurire cogebantur; Bell. Civ. Bk. I. 22 ; Adeo esse perterritos nonnullos, ut suae vitae durius consulere cogantur. The Greek translator rightly: Merd tSv nipav to0 *P/jvov repfiav&v (rvppaxlav iroiiioQai avaytcd^oiro. (Oudendorp.)
Adit. Supply Menapios.
29. Confirmatis, i. e. constitutis.
Bidui via. Ciacconius expunges the word via, as, Cic. ad Att. 5, 16, Quae aberant bidui; 5,17, A quibus aberam bidui. But in these expressions via is understood, and I have more than once observed that Caesar shuns those ellipses, which are common in other writers. So,
Bk. I. 37, we have twice tridui viam. See also Bk. IV. 4. (Davies.)
Missu Caesaris. See cap. 5.	•
1 • Cum XXV cohortibus, equivalent, of course, to two legions and a half.
4. Flumen. Schmitz says that this river must have been the Mosella, (Moselle,) a river which Caesar does not anywhere designato by its real name.
Loquitur, i. e. Labienus.
In dubium non devocaturum, “ that he will not risk” any longer.
Natura. This is here “ the love of country which is implanted in our nature,” and which some of the Gallic horsemen who served in the Roman army could not resist. (Schmitz.)
Primisque ordinibus. See note, p. 98, line 22.
17* In, considering that, or because the camps were so near each other. The preposition here contains the idea of cause.
Longum esse. This positive has the meaning of a comparative ; as is often the case, especially with adjectives denoting size or space, such as longus, multus, exiguus. Render, “it would be too long” (Schmitz.)
23
Digitized by266
Paf#
Usus .... simulatione, “practising the same deception.”— Placidet “ quietly or leisurely.”
Facultatem, “ opportunity.”
30« Praestate, “ display.”
31* Imperatori, L e. Caesar.
32* Et... . cernere, “ and is an eye-witness of every action you perform.”
36* Praeter spein, “ contrary to their expectation.”
3 T. Modo, i. e. “ iu a measure,” or “ only just,” so that it is almost equivalent to vix9 “ scarcely.” (Schmitz.)
Civitatem. This explains the preceding quoe, indicating that by quos the whole state is meant. Recipere denotes the recovery or reduction of a nation which had before revolted.
4. Propinqui Indutiomari. See cap. 2.
Cingetorigi. See Bk. V. 3, 56.
Principatus .... imperium. The former is the princely or kingly dignity, the latter the military power connected with it^
Miserant, i. e. the Germans.—Altera. Some read una, which Oudendorp pronounces less elegant than the received lection
Transduxerat. See Bk. IV. 17.
Nota .... ratione, i. e. the manner of making a bridge was known and had been tried.
Ubii. See Book IV. 16.
Communi odio = propter commune odium.
Amplius, “still more,” i. e. more in addition to those who were already with Caesar.—Dare, soil. se. The pres, infin. inhere used for the future. See A- and S. § 268, Rem. 3.—Cognita causa = on inquiry.
31. Homines, referring to the Suevi.	/
3 T. Penitus, i. e. deep intd the interior of the country.
39. Appellatur. The indicative shows that this clause is inserted by Caesar himself, and forms no part of the report of the Ubii.—Bacerrie. This is generally thought to have been a part of the Hercynian forest, and especially that part which is now called the Thiiringer Wald.
*• Nativo = what we call “natural,” or “made by nature herself.”
Prohibere. This verb has here a twofold meaning; namely, “ to separate,” and “ to prevent from.” In the first sense, it must be taken in connection with Cheruscos a Saevis, Suevosque ab Cheruscis; and in the latter, in connection with injuriis incursionibusque. (Schmitz.)
Alienum, improper or foreign to the design of these Commentaries.
Proponere, “ to give some account.”
Partibus. The partes are the subdivisions of the pagi.
In singulis domibus, “ in every family.”
(Quorum .... redeat, “ on whose judgment and decision all their most important affairs and resolutions depend.” Schmitz remarks that quorum contains the idea of quum, denoting cause, whence the subjunctive redeat.
Google267
Pajre
Idque, referring to this division among the Gauls.	JJg
16. Eadem ratio .... totius Galliae, i. e. the constitution of all
Gaul, considering it as one great state, or as a union of states.
Alterius factionis. In cap. 11, Caesar speaks of the factions prevailing in towns and even families : he now speaks of the two great parties which agitated nearly all Gaul. See Book I. 31, and note, p. 27, line 11.
Hi, i. e. the Sequani.
Jacturis, ‘‘presents or gifts.’* The word denotes a loss which a person is obliged to sustain for the purpose of securing an advantage.
31. Divitiacus. See note, p. 22, line 10.—Auxilii petendi causa,
&c It was usual for nations in alliance with the Romans, when iu danger from any cause, to send an embassy to the senate to implore aid, which was seldom denied.
Adventu Caesaris, i. e. at the time of the arrival of Caesar.— Commutatione. This was in consequence of the defeat of Ariovistus by Caesar. See Book I. 35.
3 7. Eorum, i. e. of the Aedui.—Amplificata. The word is here made to agree only with dignitate, though, strictly speaking, it ought to agree with reliquis rebus, of which gratia and dignitate are only explanations. (Schmitz.)
39. Adaequare, i. e. Remos aeque ac Aeduos in gratia esse.
Illi, i. e. the Remi.	117
Collectam, “ acquired.”
Principes. The Aedui were the first in regard to their power and resources, but in the favor of Caesar they were only equal to the Remi.
7 • Q,ui .... duo = “ there are (only) two classes who are of any consideration and held in any esteem.”
Nullo, the dative, an old form for nulli, Cf. note, p. 97, line 7.
Pleriquc, i. e. “ most of the plebs,” which, as just stated, is not counted as one of the two classes of which the Gauls consisted.
 Q,uae, i. e. quae (jura sunt) dominis, &c.—Sed, is here resumptive of what was said in the commencement of the chapter. The brief digression respecting the Gallic plebs, interrupted the author’s remarks relative to the two principal parties in Gaul.
Druidum. The derivation of the name is much disputed. Michelet terms them “ men of the oaks Dervo (Cymric), Deru (Armori- can), Dair (Gaelic),—Oak. Respecting Druidism, its discipline, hierarchy, &c., consult Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. pp. 43-45 ; and Anthon’s Classical Dictionary, pp. 456, 457. Caesar himself is the main authority for all that is known with certainty respecting this powerful and important class.
Intersunt. This does not mean that the Druids alone were present, and that others were excluded from religious ceremonies; but intere88e here indicates their active presence, as the Druids themselves had to perform the religious ceremonies ; see cap. 16. Compare Book VII.
87, proelio interessc. (Schmitz.)—Religiones. This in the plural de-
GoogleNOTES.
H7n°tefl not only the doctrines of a religion, but all the phenomena connected with it, such as omens, prodigies, and all kinds of signs.
IT* II, i. e. the Droids.
18* Fere, according to Schmitz, qualifies the whole clause, and does not belong to omnibug.
19« Facta* Supply eat or sit.
Si qui = siquis. The former is more definite than the latter.
Sacrificiis interdicunt, “ they forbid them the sacrifices,” i. e. they excommunicate them from participation in their religious rites.
96. Jus redditur, “ is justice dispensed.”
31 • De principatu, i. e. for the office of chief Druid.
3 2» Q,uae regio .... habetur. No other place was equally con* venient to the Druids, who assembled from all parts of Gaol. For this Bame reason, no doubt, the Amphictyone assembled at Delphi, because that town was in the heart of Greece. See Strabo, 9, p. 419 ; Pausanias, 7, p. 445. (Davies.)
Disciplina. The word here denotes “ the knowledge” or “ the wisdom and system of the Druids.”
Reperta. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 177 ; Ramsh. 577 ; Crombie, p. 235. The latter says, “ invenire expresses the power or the faculty, as weH as the act; reperirs denotes the latter only.”
IUo, i. e. into Britaiu.
118 Disciplinam. It here means the instruction in the wisdom of the Druids, or the place where such instruction is given.
Ibi, referring to the schools of the Druids.
3. Annos...-. permanent, “ some continue twenty years in (thfe) study.”
Ea, i. e. the subjects of the verses they require to be learned.
7 • Rationibus, not “ accounts,” as in Book I. 29, but “ affaire” generally.
Id, i. e. this peculiar custom of not committing their instructions to writing.
Non interire animas, sed ab aliis post mortem transire ad alios. This was the doctrine of Pythagoras: Diod. S. 5, p. 306. ’Evnr- Xfct yip wap' airois (FaXdruts) 6 Uv6ay6pov \6yof, Bn ras tpvx&f T^v ApOpAwuv iOavdrovs elvai cvpfH&tiKS, teal ii* irdv kpiaphwv wdXiv piovv, sis Irspov oQfta rfc tyxiif Mvopivijs. But whether the Druids drew their doctrine from Pythagoras, or he himself rather borrowed it from them, seems doubtful to Lipsius, Physiol. Stoic. 3, 12. Alexander indeed in Clem. Alex. Str. 1, p. 223, ed. Lugd. maintains that Pythagoras dariaoivai TaXarii*. But I am more inclined to listen to Amm. Marce Minus, 15, 9 ; Druidae ingentis celsiores, ut auctoritas Pythagorae decrevit, sodalitiis adstricti consortiis, quaestionibus occultarum rerum altarumque erecti sunt; ut, despectantes humana, pronunciarint animas immortales. Certainly, since the Gauls devoted themselves to the literature of Marseilles, as appears from Straho, 4, p. 181, it is no wonder that they were imbued with the Pythagorean
Digitized by Google269
Page
doctrines. In this opinion at least Iamblichus, V. P. n. 173, seems to JJg have been. Origen, however, Philos. 2, p. 46, expressly says : '0 row
TlvOaydpov oIkIttjs Zapo\£is rods irapa Ke\rois ApvtdaS \iytrai iiSdfai fiXoooQtiv rijv UvOaydpaov <pi\o<ro<plav. He nearly repeats the same words, c. 25, p. 168. (Davie3.)
13. Excitari. Supply homines.
Ambactos. Schmitz thinks this is probably not a Latin word, but a Gallic or Celtic word (andhaht, i. e. minister) which denotes poisons who attend upon the uobles. It is not impossible that Caesar may mean to explain the word by clientes, the que often serving to join an explanation to some preceding word.
26. Religionibus =, according to Morus, ritibus sacris9 usque superstitiosis.	'
Pro victimis homines immolant, “ they ofler human victims in sacrifices.” This horrible practice is mentioned by other writers, and it seems to be true that the religion of the Druids instituted human sacrifice. If not so, it at least adopted it and kept it up, with attendant circumstances which make one shudder at the awful cruelties and abominations of heathenism.
Simulacra, “ images,” which probably represented their various gods.
Supplicia, “ punishments.”
3T. Noxa. The word means, any evil deed by which injury is done to another person.
Ejus generis. Supply nocentium.
Supplicia, = “sacrificing or immolating.’*
1. Mercurium. This (according to Schmitz) cannot have been the JJQ Mercury of the Romans; and it must be borne in mind that both Greeks and Romans, when they became acquainted with a new divinity in a foreign country, forthwith identified it with the one among their own gods with whom he seemed to have any resemblance. The Mercury in this place is probably the Odin or Wodan of the northern nations, Apollo the god Belenus, Mars the god Thor, Jupiter the Gallic god Taran or Taranin, and Minerva is perhaps the goddess of the moon.
Apollinem. Supply colunt.
Huic, i. e. Mars.
Q,uae. It has here a general meaning comprising both animalia and reliquae res. The meaning is, “ whatever they conquer, they treat in either of two ways; if the booty consists of animals, they sacrifice them; and if of any other things, they collect them into one place.” (Schmitz.)
IT. Dite. Dis is the god of the lower world, commonly called Pluto.
By calling themselves his descendants they probably meant to describe themselves as aborigines or alr6x0ovtf, those who sprang from the earth
itself.
Spatia omnis temporis, “ all the intervals of time.” This mode 23*
Google270
]|j) of computation m stated by Tacitus to have been followed by the ancient Germans. Compare also the scriptural expressions in the beginning of Genesis.
19* Finiunt, i. e. definiunt, “ they define or compute.’1
90. Ut noctem dies subsequatur, i. e. they began their reckoning with the night instead of the day, counting from sunset to sunset, and not from sunrise to sunrise.
23« Palam, openly, i. e. publicly, in public.
Conjunctim ratio habetur, " a joint account is kept”
Fructus, “ interest”
In servilem .... habent. Among the Romans slaves only were examined by torture; citizens gave evidence upon oath.
33. Si compertum est, i. e. if the suspicion is confirmed, viz. that the wife had caused the death of the husband.
36. Pro cultu, “ considering the manner in which the Gauls live.” See Book IV. 3 ; ut est captus Germanorum.
3T. Vivis cordi fuisse, “ to have been dear to them when living.”
39. Supra hanc memoriam, i. e. not long before the time of which we have any recollection. (Schmitz.)
120 »• Justis funeribus. The justa funera were the funeral rites, which by the laws of religion they were bound to perform.
Commodius, i. e. better or more judiciously, viz. than other states.
Sanctum, for sancitum.
7 • Imperitos, “ inexperienced,” i. e. in public affairs.
Per concilium. The preposition relates to the way and manner as well as the time of doing any thing. Oudendorp notes per ea tempora, per hiemem, and similar expressions.
13* Neque sacrificiis student, “ nor are they much given to sacrifices.”
13. Vulcanum = “fire.” It is this element personified.
Ne .... acceperunt. Tacitus, -who is mnch better authority, contradicts this statement (See De Moribus Germ. 9.) Caesar, says Davies, might easily have been deceived, as he passed only a few days within the limits of Germany.
Ab parvulis .... student, “ from infancy they are inured to labor and fatigue.”
Impuberes, “ chaste,” or “ in an unmarried condition.”
Intra .... vicesimum, i. e. M before the twentieth year.”
Promiscue, i. e. without any distinction of sex or age.
Rhenonum. The rhenones are said by some to have been a peculiar kind of dress, covering the shoulders and breast down to the stomach, while others beliefs them to be the name of the reindeer, and tegumenta rhenonum the skins of those animals. The latter seems to be more probable, and the meaning therefore is: “ they cover their bodies either with the entire skin of the reindeer, or with a sort of apron (parvis tegumentis) made of the same material” (Schmitz.)271
pv
28» Gentibus» These appear to be " the tribes,” and the cognatio- J20 neo following “ the families” belonging to a gens.
30» Alio, i. e. in alium locum.
33» Humiliores, L e. tenuiores or infirmiores.
33. Q,ua, for aliqua.
37» Cum potentissimis, i. e. cum opibus potentissimorum. Aequa- ri, “ to be made or esteemed equal,” is more generally construed with the dative or accusative than with cum. See Z. § 389, note 2.
39. Civitatibus, i. e. to each state.
1» Solitudines habere» See Bk. IV. 1, 3.—Hoc .... existimant, 121 “ this they regard as a proof of their valor.” The infinitives following, cedere and consistere, are explanatory of hoc.
3. Defendit, ^repels.”
Jus dicunt controversiasque minuunt, “administer justice and decide controversies.” Minuunt, “ they diminish the number of lawsuits,” viz. by bringing about amicable arrangements between the parties at issue.
Desidiae minuendae, i. e. tollendae prorsus et eradicandae; for this is no unfrequent sense of the word. Horaee, Epist. 2, 1, 107, Crescere res posset, minui damnosa libido. So Caesar says, a little before, controversias minuere in the sense of “ deciding and terminating.” It is worthy of remark that the Lacedaemonians for the same reason permitted predatory expeditions. (Davies.)
14» Causam, “ the plan or the proposed expedition.”
13» Q,ui ex iis, referring to those who have promised their aid and approved of the enterprise.
19» Sanctos, “ inviolable.” The word is used of men and things under the especial protection of the gods. See Ramsh. 894.
£3» EratosthenL He was born B. C. 276, died B. C. 192, and was one of the most learned men and greatest geographers of antiquity. He was librarian of Ptolemy Euergetes at Alexandria in Egypt.
26» Ctuam illi, i. e. et quam illi.
29» Opinionem, “ reputation.”
30» Patientia» It denotes the patient and voluntary endurance of hardships.
31» Gallis, i. e. the Volcae Tectosages, who remained in Gaul and did not migrate.
32» Transmarinarum rerum, “ foreign commodities.”
3T» Finiri» The verb is here taken in a sense rather unusual for dimetiri, “ ascertaining the space from limit to limit.” (Vossius.)
39» Recta regione, i. e. “ in a straight line along the banks of the Danube.” Regio (from regere) often signifies the line or direction which a thing takes, as in diversis regionibus below. Cf. Bk. VII. 46.
1 • Sinistrorsus, i. e. to the northward.	122
3» Hujus Germaniae, i. e. western Germany, the part in which Caesar himself was.
Google272
fee*
iBlthun» meaning the eastern extremity.—Dicat, “ can say.”— Quum, “ although.”
Acceperit, connected by out with dicat.
Bos* The reindeer is here meant It is very plain, however, that Caesar never saw the animal, but speaks from uncertain rumor, or he would
not have described it as having one horn in the centre of its forehead.
11* Palmae. The word means a shovel or the flat part of an oar. (Schmitz.) Others render, “ palms,” referring to the leaves of the palm-tree.
1 2. (tuam. It commonly goes with superlatives to strengthen their meaning. It also occurs with the positive, and has the same effect. See Livy xxxv. 15. (Schmitz.)
Alces, “elks.” The description is not to be received as complete, arising out of the same cause, viz. his not having seen the animals.
Varietas. Their color is referred to. It varies at different seasons of the year.
Se applicant, = “ they lean.”
Summa species, i. e. “the general aspect.”
Hue, i. e. in his, “ upou these.”
2T. Uri. Urus is a German word, (the full form is auer-ochs or ur-ochs,) and signifies “ a mountain-bull,” or “ wild bull.”
(	28. Paulo infra elephautos, “ a little less than elephants.” The
statement is, of course, exaggerated, being derived from mere hearsay.
3 2. Exercent. Supply sc.
Assuescere ad homines, “to be reconciled to men,” “to be domesticated.”
3T. Haec, “ these horns.”
38. Ah labris, i. e. where the lips (labra) touch them in drinking out of them.—Amplissimis, “ their most splendid.”
Laesar postquam, &,c. The narrative is resumed from cap. 10.
3. Supra demonstravimus. See cap. 22.
13. Bellum Ambiorigis. See cap. 5.—Per Arduennam silvam, &c. These and the words following, to patet, are thought to be an interpolation: hence we have enclosed them in brackets. Cf. Bk. V. 3 ; VI. 33.
Basilus. He was afterwards one of the conspirators who slew Caesar.
20. Subsequi. The present infinitive used for the future. See A. and S. § 268, Rem. 3.
Multum fortuna potest, “fortune can do much,” i. e. fortune is very powerful. So below, multum fortuna valuit.
Ipsum, i. e. Ambiorix.
Fama ac nunciis afferretur. This is the reading of Ouden- dorp. Others read, fama aut nuncius afferretur; and others again, fama ac nuncius adventus afferretur. The true lection is not very clear.
Instrumento. This word has often a collective meaning, denoting all implements of war; so that it is the same as apparatus militaris. Cf. Bk. V. 31.
Google273
Page
Ipsum effugere mortem. These words form the subject of J23 the clause, and magnae fortunae fuit, the predicate ; “ the circumstance
of his (Ambiorix) escapiug alive was a piece of great good luck.” Davies does not doubt that Caesar gave orders that they should put Ambiorix to death, as the author of the sedition, if he fell into their hands, as Labienus also conducted himself towards Indutiomarus; Bk. V. 58.
Ad subeuudum .... ad vitandum. The former refers to the Romans under Basilus; the latter to Ambiorix, who escaped the unexpected attack.
39. Ambiorix copias suas judlcione .... dubium cst, “it is doubtful whether Ambiorix did not assemble his forces from choice,” &c.
1 • An tempore exclusus, “ or whether prevented by want of time.”
Sibi consulere. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 233.
Continentes = continuas.
Insulis. These appear to have been the downs near the coast, according to Dr. Schmitz.
Precibus, “imprecations or curses.” Davies refers to the preces iratae. (Hor. Sat. 2, 6, 30; Epod. 5, 85.) So also Druidum preces dirae. (Tacit. Ann. 14, 30.)
Taxo. This is the yew-tree, of which the berries, not the leaves, are poisonous.
19. Nihil, stronger than non = “ in no way,” or “ in no manner.”
See Bk. II. 20.
Captivorum, an object, genit. = “ by questioning the captives.”
21. Reliquis rebus, “for other reasons.” The ablative is equivalent to ob with the accusative.—Superioris anni munitiones, meaning the fortifications of Titurius and Cotta. See cap. 37.
Q,. Tullius Cicero, the brother of the orator. See Bk. V. 38,
39, &c.
34. Versus. This is originally a participle, (from verto,) but came afterwards to be used as a preposition, and then the prepositions ad or in, which were originally joined to the participle, were yet retained in convert sational language, whence we often find ad versus or in versus. (Schmitz.)
Scaldim. This is the modern Schelde, emptying itself into the sea below Antwerp. Caesar’s description has led commentators to the belief that originally a branch of the Schelde flowed into the Meuse ; but it must either be supposed that the whole country between the Schelde and Meuse has entirely changed its aspect since the days of Caesar, or that Caesar was mistaken in saying quad influit in Mosam. Thus Dr. Schmitz; others avoid the difficulty by reading Sabim, (now Sambre,) which flows into the Meuse in the territory of the Aduatuci. The Greek paraphrase has Zdfliv.
Diem septimum. Supply inchoatum. It is hence equivalent J25 to “ on the seventh day.” See cap. 35.
4. Reipublicae. The word here means “the common good” = salus pubHca.
Google'	274
F«f»
8uPra demonstravimus* See cap. 31.—Manu* certa nulla. Ambiorix bad not assembled his forces, but ordered them to conceal themselves ; hence there was no regular force collected in one place.
13* Vicinitatibus = vicini*, the abstract for the concrete.—Diligentiam, scii. Caesaris.
Non ... . intuenda, i. e. “ not in the care for the protection of the whole mass of the army.1’
Ex parte, “ in some measure.”
IT* Nam et* Nam refers to the clause in singuli*, &c.
20* Vellet, i. e. Caesar.
22* Instituta ratio, “ the established discipline.’*
27* Ad ulciscendum, “to avenge’* the slaughter of the troops under Titurius and Cotta.
29* Omnes	evocat spe praedae* “ Caesar overwhelms the
Eburones, the barbarian party and friendly to the Germans, by chasing their intrepid Ambiorix through the forest of Ardennes, and delivering them up to the mercy of the Gallic tribes acquainted with their retreats in the woods and marshes, who with cowardly avidity joined in hunting this quarry. The legions blockaded this unfortunate people on every side, and prevented all possibility of escape.** Michelet’s History of France, vol. I. p. 48.
31* Legionarius miles, a concise mode of expression instead of the more logical one, vita legionarii militis.
32* Facinore* See Ramsh. 1044; Crombie, p. 259.
Appetebat, “ was approaching.” The verb has this signification, especially in reference to time.
37* Reverti constituerat* See cap. 33.
38* Quantos afferat casus, “ what great changes she effects.”
Ultro* The word indicates that any one might come, without being specially commanded or called upon.
ff. Supra docuimus* See Bk. IV. 16.
7 • Perfectus = factus or exstructu*.
8* Primos, meaning those who were nearest to them.
16* Fortunatissimis* See Z. §601.
17* Fortunas* See cap. 32.
18* Praesidii tantum est, i. e. tam parvum; = “ the garrison is so small, or few in number.” See Bk. II. 8 ; VI. 27.—Cingit scii, militibus Romanis.
20* Oblata spe* Oudendorp notes that Caesar elsewhere says, Mata ape. So we have often, occasio oblata, and *pe* oblata.
21* Usi eodem duce, “ using the same person as a guide.”
26* Caesarem .... servaturum, “ that Caesar would keep his promise,” i. e. relative to the time of his return. See cap. 33.
29* Patientiam, “forbearance.”
33* Offendi* The verb offendere is properly, “to stumble against any thing,” hence the passive offendi, “ to be met by something which275
Page
m an obstacle in oar waythat is, *< to encounter a difficulty or danger.” J26 In millibus passuum tribus; the preposition in here seems to denote cause: “ considering that the distance was only three thousand paces.”
(Schmitz.)
37• Una mittuntur, “ are sent with the cohorts to forage.”
1« Hoc .... casu, “ at this moment and under these unfortunate J27 circumstances.” Some editors reject et.
3* Decumana porta* See note, p. 18, line 24.
5* Tenderent mercatores* Tendere is habere tentoria, (“ to pitch tents;”) whence (Virg. Aen. II. 29; Hic Dolopum manus, hic saevus tendebat Achilles : VIII. 605; legio latis tendebat in arvis.) But when the cantonments are going to be broken up, the phrase is detendere tentoria, (Caes. Bell. Civ. III. 85, Tabernaculisque detensis.) But the custom of the Romans deserves notice: the merchants were not permitted to dwell within the camp, but pitched their tents without it, but close to the ramparts, sub vallo. (Vossius.)
Circumfunduntur, “ crowd around.”
9* Portas tuentur* There were no ditches outside the gates; hence the enemy came directly up to them.
15* Religiones* These are fears and apprehensions arising out of a religious or superstitious feeling. These feelings were roused in this instance by the recollection that Cotta and Titurius had perished in the same place. (Schmitz.)
16. Calamitatem* See Bk. V. 37, 38, &c.
19* Nullum, i. e. perexiguum.
23* Ad = apud, as in Bk. III. 9, nomen ad omnes nationes sane* tum.—Mentionem . . . .fecimus. See Bk. II. 24.
29. In statione, “ on guard.”
30* Relinquit animus Sextium,= “ Sextius faints.” Animus is strength, energy, &c.; anima is breath, life, or soul. Oudendorp shows that Davies is wrong in rendering the phrase, “ he dies,” confounding it with relinquere animam.
33* Exaudiunt. The verb means, “ to hear at a distance.”
3T. Modo conscripti, “those who had been recently enlisted.”
4. Despecta. The verb despicere implies the idea of contempt, “ to J28 behold or perceivo with contempt.”
6* Calones* See note, p. 51, line 5.
8* Cuneo facto* The wedge was the name applied to a body of foot- soldiers, drawn up in this form for the purpose of breaking through an enemy’s line. The wedge was met by the forfex, or “ sheare,” a name given to a body of men drawn up in the form of the letter V, so as to receive the wedge between two lines of troops.
Censent* Censere, “ to be of opinion,” is here followed by ut.. . perrumpant, and not by the accusative with the infinitive, because censere contains the idea of a wish or desire.
lO* At = tamen, “ at least”
GoogleNOTES.
1 *• It refer* to content, which i* understood before it
13* Docuimus* See cap. 36.
18* Nullo .... percepto, “ having as yet acquired no experience in warfare.”
99* Demiserant* Supply se, “ they threw themselves,” or “ they came into an unfavorable position.” The pluperfect here brings the matter more vividly before us than the historical perfect, for the meaning is; “ they had come to that position, and there they then Were.” (Schmitz.)
34* Fldem non faceret, “did not make them believe,” or was hot believed.
36* Paene alienata mente, “ having almost lost their senses,” or “ so disturbed in mind as to be hardly masters of themselves.”
3T* Incolumi exercitu, the ablative absolute. It has the force of a conditional clause, “ if the army had been unimpaired.”
1* Eventus, acc. pi., meaning, “the various and uncertain chances of war.”
3* Casu, old form for casat. See cap. 44.
4* Judicavit* This clause contains the grounds on which Caesar consoled himself for the things of which he had just been complaining.
6* Maxime .... videbatur, “ it appeared the most surprising.”
14* Agebatur* This verb, when used in connection with booty, indicates that the booty consists of cattle, which are “ driven away.”
16* Anni tempore* It was autumn, and the frequent showers of that season had thrown down and spoiled the corn in the fields.
19* Liocum, “ state, condition,” &c. See Book IL 26.
90. Modo =s paullo ante, “ shortly before,” or “just before.”
91* Captivi .. . .contenderent, “the captives declared” that Ambiorix, &c.
99* ITt, the same as it a HU To coneequendi supply eum, viz. Am- hi&rigem.
94* Paene	vincerent, “ almost overcame nature by their zeal,”
i. e. well-nigh accomplished impossibilities.
30« Duarum cohortium damno, referring to the loss of the two cohorts, cut to pieces by the Sigambri With Remorum, supply urbem. It was the cepital of the Belgae.
33* Acconc* See cap. 4.
34* More majorum refers to the Romans. The execution of Aceo, which Caesar ordered to be performed according to the mode of the early Romans, consisted in the criminal being scourged to death by the lictom. (Schmitz.)
36* Aqua .... interdixisset, i. e. banished them. To forbid the use of fire and water, was the Roman judicial sentence whereby a person was banished from Italy, but might go to any other place he chose. Of course here reference is to banishment from Gaul.
38« Exercitu, old form for exercitui.
39* Conventus agendos* See note, p. 40, line 8-
Digitized by GoogleBOOK SEVENTH.
SYNOPSIS.
The cruelly set ere course pursued by Caesar, in regard to the Eburones and the Gauls generally, and the intelligence which had been received froin Italy of civil commotions, induced the Gauls to form new plans for carrying on the war against Caesar. The Carnutes and Arverni, at the instigation of Vercin- getbrix, (the general-in-chief,) first commence hostilities. Caesar returns with some difficulty to his army and enters the country of the Arverni, which obliges the Gallic general to leave the north, whither he had gone, and defend the parts attacked by Caesar. Several towns are taken by the Romans, and the inhabitants put to the sword.	■	#
Vercingetorix proposes another plan of carrying on the war, and assures his countrymen that the only hope of safety is in starving out the Roman army, and to do this it is necessary to burn down their own towns. The Bituriges do so with all theirs, (twenty in number,) except Avaricum, the finest city in Gaul. The Romans suffer much in consequence of want of provisions, and endure their privations with great fortitude. Vercingetorix, accused of treason, defends himself successfully and endeavors to succor Avaricum. The city, however, is taken after severe fighting, and most of the inhabitants are massacred.
The Aedui, the firmest and best friends of the Rdmans, revolt, partly in secret, from Caesar, and thus disappoint him of his expected force of cavalry. Caesar does what he can in the emergency ; but his soldiers attacking Gergovia too eagerly, are repulsed with great loss. Caesar censures the rashness of his troops on this occasion, abandons the siege and retires into the country of the Aedui. Labienus in the north gains a victory over the Parisii, and rejoins Caesar.
The Gauls, under the command of Vercingetorix, continue the war with vigor. A furious battle is fought, in which Caesar gains the victory by a charge of his German cavalry.
Vercingetorix retreats to Alesia, a town extremely well fortified, and sends a summons to all Gaul to come to hie aid. Caesar circumvallates. the town and the Gallie camp with vast works, enclosing a circuit of fifteen miles. A very large army is collected from all quarters, who make most earnest efforts to relieve their countrymen in Alesia; but in vain. The besieged, hard pressed and suffering from scarcity of provisions, vigorously second the efforts of their friends without Caesar’s intrenchments, but to no purpose. Violent contests serve only to confirm the superiority of the Romans, and draw on the final result. At last, in despair, Vercingetorix and Alesia surrender.
With this the campaign of the present year is concluded, and the army goes into winter-quarters.
Italiam, *• ©• the north of Italy, or Gallia Cisalpina.
P. Clodii caede. Clodius was an unprincipled and licentious Roman nobleman. He was killed in an accidental encounter by the slaves of Milo, at the command of their master, towards the end oT I. C. 53. See Arnold’s Later Roman Cwnmonioealth, pp. 918, 919.
94
Digitized by t^ooQleNOTES.
Pa*B
3. Ut omnes	conjurarent, “that all the youth of Italy
should take up arms.” Conjurare here signifies “ to take the military oath in a body/* for as the dangers were urgent, there was no time for administering the military oath (sacramentum) to each individually. They were called tumultuarii milites, because such a conjuratio generally happened during a tumult The juniores are all those between the ages of seventeen and forty-six, who were bound to serve in the legions.
*• Dissensionibus* The dissensiones here referred to, are most probably the riots and disorders that broke out at Rome in consequence of the murder of Clodius, the trial of Milo, &c.
3* Q,ui .... doierent* A relative clause expressing the reason of what goes before, takes the subjunctive. See A. and S. § 264, 8.
6. De Acconis morte. See Book VI. 44—Casum, “ misfortune.’*
T. Recidere posse, “ might befall.”
9* Deposcunt. Supply tales or eos, to which the following qui (= ut) refers.
IO.	Etfus = ejus rei. It is explained by the clause ut Caesar ab exercitu, Ac.
Praestare interfici, “ that it was better to be slain.”
Recusare, the pres, infin. instead of the future serves to give vividness to the statement in the text—Principes .... facturos, “ that they will be the first of all to commence the war.”
Obsidibus cavere = dare obsides in pignus fidei. (Bk. VI. 2.) —Ne refers to cavere.
Ut belongs to petunt, and ne (line 24) refers to the whole clause, ut jurejurando ac fide sanciatur.
26. Ejus rei, i. e. beginning the war against the Romans.
Desperatis. The word means, one who despairs of himself, so that, as Schmitz says, the passive desperatus has the meaning of the Greek middle voice.
Ctui negotiandi, Ac. The negotiatores or merchants in the Roman provinces were chiefly equites: their business was of a twofold nature: they either lent money at a very high per centage to the provincials, or purchased large stores of grain, which they conveyed to Italy and Rome. (Schmitz.)
Proximis tradunt, i. e. they formed a line of communication, being stationed at intervals. The arrangement was not unlike a modem telegraph.
totius,	i.	e.	Celticae
9* Ex civitate, i. e. ex tata regione.
Ctui Oceanum attingunt. The Armoric states are meant See Book II. 34; V. 53.
Efficiat, i. e. efficere or conficere debeat, “ which every state had to raise.”
Summam .... severitatem, “ the utmost rigor of power.”279
?B*B
*22. Ms^ore commisso delicto, equivalent to a conditional clause; 132 “ if a person committed a serious crime.”
In fide. It appears to be the same as in clientela.
De consilio, “in accordance with the advice.” Similar expressions are, de more, de sententia, &c.
39. Ipsi, i. e. the Bituriges.
Ponendum = in meaning to statuendum, affirmandum.	133
6. Urbanas res, &c. During the disturbances which took place at Rome after the murder of Clodius, Pompey was elected sole consul and ordered by the senate to watch over the safety of the whole republic.
(lua. Before qua we must supply dubitans or nesciens: “ he found himself in great difficulties, not knowing,” &c.
IT. Versus. See note, p. 124, line 34.
1 8. Antevertendum. The verb antevertere is, “ to anticipate a person, and thereby to prevent his carrying out his plan otnnibus consiliis is the ablative, and equivalent to prae omnibus consiliis. The sense is: “ before forming any other plan, Caesar thought it necessary to go to Narbo.” (Schmitz.)
Rutenis. A part of these people belonged to the Roman province, and these are here called Ruteni provinciales.
26. Putabat, scii. Lucterius.
2T. Proficiscitur, scii. Caesar.
29. Discussa, “ being cleared away.” Oudendorp rather prefers discisa, which is the reading given by Oberlin. In that case, the word refers to the cutting away the ice with axes, &c.
3 2. Singulari homini, equivalent to singulis hominibus; for singularis usually signifies, that which is singular in its kind, or that which is not like any thing else. (Schmitz.)
Q,uod .... praeceperat = “because he had foreseen that Ver- 134 cingetorix would act in this manner.” Usu venire is equivalent to accidere or evenire. Opinione praecipere is, “ to believe a thing before it actually takes place.”
Per causam supplementi, i. e. supplementi cogendi causa.
De sua salute, i. e. contra se or contra suam salutem.
Rursus reducit, pleonastic. It is common in the case of rursus with a verb having the prefix re.
20. Acduisque attribuerat, i. e. ut iis stipendia et tributa solverent, “ had rendered tributary to the Aedui.”
Ne. It depends on some verb denoting fear, which is implied in the word difficultatem.
In eo, i. e. in Caesar.
Videret, soil. Gallia: “since all Gaul would see that he was unable to protect his friends.”
Ab re. The ab here indicates the source of the possible suffering.
—Durae subvectiones are “ the laborious and difficult ways in which provisions are to be obtained or supplied.” (Schmitz.)
Google280.	NOTES.
Altero die, ** on the second day.”
30« Oppugnare instituit, soil, id, which is expressed in the next clause. .
1« Iter faceret, va. to Gergovia, to attack Vercingetorix.
3« Eam rem, i. e. oppugnationem urbis Vellaunoduni.
8. Continebat, Schmitz says that the town lay on both sides of the river, so that its two parts were conitected by the bridge.
Excubare, “ to keep watch,” i. e. at the bridge.
Perpaucis .... caperentur, i. e. “ so very few of the number of the enemies being missing, (having escaped,) that it might be said att were taken alive.”
20. Oppugnatione desistit, scii. Gergoviae.
21« Biturigum, positum In via. These words are enclosed in brackets, as being probably interpolated. Noviodunum was a town of the Aedui, and not of the Bituriges. Its modern name is Nevers on the Loire.
32« Ex significatione Gallorum, “from the signs made to one another by the Gauls.”
3T. Submittit, The verb submittere is the same as auxilio mittere ; sub in composition frequently having the meaning of “ support”
l>0testatem,	scii.	suam.
Ann! tempore. It was the depth of Winter. See cap. 8.
Petere. Supply pabulum.
IT. Hoc spatyo . . . . videantur, i. e. “from the territory of the Boiahs, in all directions, as far as it appeared possible for the enemy to go to forage.” Boia appears to be equivalent to terra Boia. The reading of the passage, however, is disputed and doubtful.
Harum rerum. The words refer to vici and aedificia, as well as pabulum.
22* Ne . . . . ne. Used for the more common expression utrum .... an. See Arnold, Pr. Intr. 102, &c.
2T, Praedamque tollendam. Hotomann thinks the last word superfluous, though it is found in all the MSS., and required by the un> elliptical and perspicuous style of Caesar. Phaedrus 2, 8; Quem convocata jubet occidi familia, Praedamque tollit. (Oudendorp.)
3T. Incendi placeret. Before these words we must supply utrum, which is omitted for the purpose of making the question more lively and animated. (Schmitz.)	■	"
*• Et> “ and that” The word following ei is explanatory of the word preceding it, as often in Caesar.
6. Precibus, scii, motus; or, propter preces et propter misericordiam. The genitive vulgi is objective.
In ... . tempora, “ at all times of the day.”
16. Occurrebatur. The verb occurrere is “ to meet an emergency,” or “ to provide against it.” The manner in which this was done is explained by the clause beginning with ut.
Intermissa, i. e. interjecta inter jtumcn et paludem. The ap«
24*281
jproach to the town was by a narrow strip of laud where the river and |37 marsh did not overflow or prevent.—Supra diximus. See cap. 15.
2$. Alteri^ i. e. the Aedui.
Alteri, i. e. the Boii.—Non magnis facultatibus, the ablative - absolute, “ the others possessing but small means.”
28* Usque eo, “ to such a degree.” The words belong to affecto exercitu.
Meruisse. Supply stipendia. Stipendia merere signifies “ to serve in the army.”
39. Genabi .... interissent. See cap. 3.—Parentarent. The word is here used instead of the infinitive. See Bk. II. 10, (p. 45, line 33, note,) where convenirent is employed instead of convenire. The verb parentare signifies, “ to perform those rites and duties which are due to the dead hence also, “to take vengeance for the death of a pereon.” (Schmitz.)
In artiores silvas, “in the thicker part of the woods,” i. e. J3g where the crowded state of the trees prevented access.
Generatim, i. e. “ according to the tribes to which they belonged.” Some think in civitates superfluous.
Saltus, is “ a thick wood,” through which it is difficult to pass, whether on a mountain or in a plain.
Haesitantes, “ sticking in the mire or mud.”
Q,ui . .,. videret, “ he who should see.” The singular has here a collective meaning.
Aequo Marte, “ with equal success,” or “ on equal terms.” Mars, the god of war, is often used to designate war itself, and its various ehances and mishaps.
39. Condemnari, “ to be declared guilty.”
39. Potuisse. This and the following infinitives depend upon a verb of “ saying,” whieh is implied in insimulatus.
Persuasum. Supply sibi fuisse.—Munitione, scii, naturali. 139
Neque .... et. It frequently happens in Latin, that a writer begins a clause with nec or neque, as if he was going to use another beginning with the same negative, but instead of it he employs et, the sentence not being a negative one. See Bk. IV. 29. (Schmitz.)
Mollitiem, “ want of energy and perseverance,” qualities espe- pecially required in this emergency.
Nullum. It is stronger and more emphatic than non.
Remittere. Supply se, “ he would leave it to their own judgment”
Operis laborem, i, ©• eundi, muniendi, oppugnandi molestiam.
Victorem. This and similar verbal substantives are often used
as adjectives in Caesar and other writers.
In eo, “in the case of a person.”
Statuunt, ut. Ut, after statuo, instead of the accusative with the infinitive, occurs occasionally.
Genus = gens, with which in fact it is etymologically identical.140 ®* Falces. These are falces murales, or the iron hooks fastened to long poles, by means of which the besiegers endeavored to pull down the walls. Compare cap. 81. The Gauls caught these hooks with slings, and kept them away from the walls, (destinabant,) and then dragged them, by means of ropes (tormenta, from torqueo) into the town. (Schmitz.)
8. Subtrahebant, i. e. they dragged down the mound on which the Roman fortifications stood, by undermining, and thus causing it to fall down. Compare note, p. 65, line 24.
11. Contabulaverant. Compare note, p. 102, line 15.
Quantum .... expresserat, i. e. " as much as the earth daily accumulated had raised our towers.” Caesar has used a term of art Deprimere and exprimere are opposed to each other: the one means M to let down,” the other, “ to raise up.”
16. Malis. Tho mali are perpendicular beams like masts: they were fixed either in the walls, or in the towers already standing, and thus served to raise them. (Schmitz.)
Morabantur. The w’ords morari cuniculos signify the fact that the Gauls obstructed the passages of the cuniculi mado by the Romans, so that they could not approach the walls.
Muris autem, &c. Tho following appears to be the mode of construction as here described by Caosar. Beams, forty feet in length,
Digitized by GoogleBOOK VII
Fift
were laid from front to rear upon the ground, parallel to each other, J40 and two feet apart, so that their length constituted the breadth or thickness of the wall; and consequently, when the wall was completed, the ends only of the beams were visible. These beams were firmly secured within the wall, and the spaces between them were filled with earth.
In front, however, instead of earth, large stones were placed between the beams. When this layer of beams, earth, and stones was completed, a similar one was laid over it, but in such a manner that the beams of the former course were now covered with earth and stones, and the earth and stones of the former course with beams. In front, therefore, the ends of the beams and stones formed a kind of checker-work. (Andrews.)
Perpetuae, “ solid,” “ unbroken,” &c.
Alternis trabibus ac saxis, ablative absolute, “ beams and stones alternating.”
2. Consuetudine, i. e. pro sua consuetudine, “ as he was wont to 141 do.” It is the ablative of cause.
lO.	Vix ratio iniri posset, “ a plan could hardly be formed,” i. e. it was difficult to determine, &c.
12* Pluresque. Supply legiones.
Reducerent, “rolled back.” These towers were moveable
Digitized by LjOOQle284
Paffe
241 and stood on wheels.—Aggeremque interscinderent, “ and they intersected or cut across the mound,” i. e. they separated the portion which was undermined and on fire, from the remainder of the mound.
Apertos, i. e. non tectos, “ unprotected by the plutei.**
Vestigio temporis, “ a point or moment of time.’*
Per man us. The Gauls formed a line, in which those balls were handed from one to another until the last threw them into the burning tower of the Romans. (Schmitz.)
Scorpione. This was a missile thrown by hand. It was small, but with very sharp points, so that it penetrated deep into the body and produced fatal wounds. The scorpiones were often dipped in poison.
Propugnatoribus. The term propugnator is properly applied to those wrho, being besieged or blockaded, defend the ramparts of a town, or the intrenchmeuts of a fortified position, or fight from the deck of a ship in self-defence ; here it is used simply for “ persons besieged,” and often for “ the defender or protector of another.” See Gronov. Obs. 4, 19, p. 748, who remarks, “ that the besieged are never said simply oppugnare, but propugnare ; as, on the other hand, the besiegers are never 6aid propugnare, but oppugnare. Sometimes both parties assume the opposite character, as wheu, for instance, the besieged make a sally, and attack the intrenchmeuts of the hostile camp; then in truth the former are 6aid oppugnare, and the besiegers propugnare, with respect to one and the same camp.” (Barker.)
Restincto aggere, “ the fire of the mound being extinguished.”
34. Consilium .... profugere. See A. and S. § 204, Rem. 9.
Davies says the infiuitive for the gerund (profugiendi) is a Hellenism very frequent in the poets, and occasionally in prose writers.
10* Directis, viz. against those parts of the wall where they might produce the greatest effect.
In occulto. This is explanatory of intra vineas. Caesar addressed them while they were within the vineae, and could not bo seen by the enemy.—Expeditas, “ prepared for battle.”
22. Obviam contra. Some reject contra, which certainly seems pleonastic here.
Circumfundi. Supply hostes, which is implied in the preceding neminem. (Schmitz.)
Continenti impetu, i. e. cursu non intermisso, * without stopping, they ran to the farthest part of the town.**
2T. Se ipsi premerent, “ they crowd themselves.’*
29. Sic = “ to such a degree.”—Genabensi caede. See cap. 3.
Disparandos, i. o. separandos or dispertiendos. Vercingetorix took care that they should be separated according to the tribes to which they belonged, and that each should be taken to the men of his own tribe in the camp. (Schmitz.)
** ahimo demitterent. It is the same as animum abjicerent. Animum abjicere is “ to lose courage.”—Admodum = “ to such a degree.”book vii.	285
T. Nimia obsequentia, “ the too ready compliance.”	J43
Consensu, old form of dative for consensui.
Re integra, i. e. before the siege of Avaricum.
Affirmatione. With active verbs, the participles ductus, motus, &lc., are commonly found in place of the simple ablative. (Andrews.)
See A. and S. § 247, Rem. 2.
Consternati, “ roused,” = erecti, or concitati, which are more commonly used in this sense. Cf. Livy, vii. 42. (Schmitz.)
2T. Patienda et perferenda. The synonymous words serve to express the meaning more forcibly.
30. Animo laborabat, “ seriously exerted himself.”
3 2. Q,uorum. It depends on oratione.
Q,ucm .... velit, i. e. quem adduci velit, et ante quam diem adduci velit, constituit.
3. Et quos, i. e. cum iis quos.—Conduxerat. The verb conducere J44 intercede understood) means, “ to hire mercenaries.”
13. Rem, scii, publicam ; the state of the Aedui.
Cognationis. This is equivalent to our expression, “ family connection.” Caesar means to say that he had many and powerful relations.
Clientelas = clientes. Supply esse, “each had,” &c
Positum, (esse.) The subject is id ne accidat.
Detrimentosum. This word occurs in Caesar only, and in this place only. Some editors propose a different reading in consequence, but needlessly, we think. It has the force of words in -osus, meaning “ very detrimental or injurious.” See Z. § 252, 9.
Aluisset. The verb alere has here the meaning of “ to favor or support.”
31 • Praevertendum, scii, esse sibi.
Et quos inter, by anastrophe, for et inter quos. See A. and
S.	§ 323, 4, 1.
Renunciatum. The verb renunciare is here = “to elect or create.” Its proper meaning is, “ to announce that a person has been elected.”
3. Intromissis, “being present” Oberlin and Schmitz read *m-J45 termissis, in the sense of “ at the time when there was no magistrate.”
Secundum flumen, “ along the bank of the river, and following its course.” The Elaver (modem Allier) flows into the Loire at Nevers.
Iili, i. e. Labienus.
E regione, “ opposite to,” is commonly construed with the genitive ; but as e regione ponere is in sense the same as opponere, Caesar adopts the construction of opponere. (Schmitz.)
Q,uod non fere ante autumnum. The Elaver, then, was greater in the summer, and we account for the fact by the meltiug of the snow on the mountains, which is conveyed into the river. So, cap. 55, Ligerim ex nivibus crevisse, ut omnino vado transiri non posse videatur.
For the same reason the Rhone and Lake Leman are always more swollen iu summer, as is observed by Le Clerc, Phys. 2, 7, 31. (Davies.)
Digitized by ^.ooQleNOTES.
145 ^5.	i.	e.	constituor mansit, “he remained.’*
Captis quibusdam cohortibus. Schmitz reads, captis [quartis] quibusque cohortibus, and explains, “ having taken every fourth cohort from the sixty he had, (for he had six legions, and each legion contained ten cohorts ;) so that he had fifteen cohorts; that is, two in* complete legions, which he kept back with him, for the purpose of restoring the bridge ;** but the reading here is very doubtful, and much perplexed. According to the reading of the text, it would appear that Caesar so arranged the four legions which he sent forward as to give them the appearance of six legions.
27m His, referring to the troops which were sent forward.
35* (luintis castris = quinto die, or “ after a journey of five days.” A Roman army encamped regularly every night.
39. Agendum, i. e. cogitandum.
4. Despici. Supply in castra Romana.—Horribilem, “ formidable.”
1 2m Kt aquae .... pabulatione. According to the ordinary mode of speaking, we should here have aqua (that is, ab aqua) magnam partem (or magna parte, “ to a great extent”) et pabulatione. There is an irregularity in the use of the ablative pabulatione instead of the genitive pa- bulationis, dependent, like aquae, upon magna parte. (Schmitz.)
13. Prohibituri, “likely to prevent.”
13. Tamen, refers to egregie munitus, &c. •
Demonstravimus. See cap. 33.
25m Praemium. This was probably the money with which he endeavored to bribe them.
Imperio natos, i. e. ad imperium natos, “ born to rule.”
Q,ua traducta, i. e. “ if that state were brought over to the side
of Vercingetorix.”
Causam obtinuerit. Causam obtinere is a judicial term, signifying “to gain a lawsuit.”
Vel, “ even.” Since they declared that they would even be the first to carry the design into effect.
Decem illis millibus. See cap. 34.
Indicta causa, i. e. “ without having had an opportunity of defending themselves.”
IT. Quasi vero. This is an ironical expression, answering to our “ as if, indeed.” See Z. § 572.—Ac non necesse, i. e. ac non potius sil necessitatis.
26. Tota civitate, i. e. per civitatem.
28. Suas injurias, taken passively, “the injuries they had suffered.” See A. and S. § 211, Rem. 3.
3 1 • Gratia, i. e. apud populum.
Ab eo, i. e. by Caesar.
Summis opibus = summo labore, “ with the greatest exertious.”
^uorum salutem, dec. The danger to be apprehended from Li- tavicus’s joining the Arvemi was the carrying over the whole state, since287
*****
Caesar could hardly expect the Aedui to unite with him against their J48 own countrymen.
IS* Nulla .... dubitatione = sine mora.
7 • Ad contrahenda castra. The camp would need to be contracted in such a manner as to correspond with the diminished number of legions remaining to defend it.
Permoveantur, 11 that they might not be uneasy or alarmed.”— Cupidissimis omnibus, “ all being most anxious,” viz. to set out, in consequence of Caesar’s exhortation.
20. Clientibus, i. e. solduriis. See Bk. III. 22.
21* Fortuna, i. e. mala fortuna, “ in extreme misfortune.”
Q,uos, i. e. quum eos.
Eisdem, i. e. they had been obliged to remain on the rampart, and as they were few in number, the work had to be done always by the same persons; whereas among the enemies, the place of the fatigued soldiers had been taken by those who were yet fresh. (Schmitz.)
33. Tormenta. These were engines used in casting darts and stones.
—Eorum, i. e. hostium.
Ad cognoscendum, “ to discover the truth of the reports.”
IIli hominum generi, i. e., says Schmitz, illi genti, viz. to the J49 Gauls. Respecting their credulity and curiosity, see Bk. IV. 5.
Sanitatem, i. e. sana mens. See Bk. I. 42.
8. Educunt, “ they induced or obliged him to go out.”
Q,uaestionem .... decernunt, “ they determine that an investigation shall be made.”
Capti compendio, i. e. “captivated or led by the gain;” for compendium (from cum and pendere) is properly the profit which the purchaser makes, in receiving somewhat more than the weight which is due to him, or a gain which a person makes by saving or economizing, and then gain, profit, or advantage in general. (Schmitz.)
Ea res, viz. the bonorum direptio, in which many persons had taken part.
Deminuere. Supply quidquam. Cf. Bk. I. 53.
2T. Omnem exercitum. Apart of the army under Labienus had been sent against the Parisii. See cap. 34.
Minora castra, i. e. where the two legions were stationed. See cap. 36, at the end.
3G. Cl nod jam ipse Caesar. The antecedent of quod is the clause dorsum esse} &c., which is also the subject of constabat.
Hac silvestre et angustum. So Davies. Others read hunc 8ilvc8tremf and others, hinc silvestre, &c.
Nec jam aliter sentire .... quin, i. e. “ and they had no doubt .... but that.” So Dr. Schmitz renders, and says that quin cannot follow after sentire in its usual sense.
Interclusi viderentur, i. e. interclusi forent.	J50
8. Castris detrahi. Oudendorp reads, castris mulorumque produci,
Digitized by Google286
150*9^ *** ttramsnta detrahi. Bat the words ane rejected by some of the best editors.
11. Easdem	regiones, “ the same quarter or place.”
1*. Ut, « as far as.” C/. Bk. IV. 3.
' 14* Eodem jugo. The dative jugo is equivalent to ad or verfua jugum, “ towards the same hill.”
Insignibus* See note, p. 23, line 23 ; p. 50,iine 8.
10. Raros, i. e. “ in small parties.”
Occasionis .... proelii, i. e. the hill could be taken only by their availing themselves of a favorable opportunity, and not by force.
Recta regione, “ in a direct or straight line.”
80. Huic, scii, ascensui.—Ad molliendum clivum, “ to softening the ascent of the hill,” i. e. rendering it less difficult.
Densissimis castris. These were camps placed very near to each other, and occupying as small a space as was practicable.
Trinis castris. The Gauls encamped by nations or tribes, (see cap. 36,) though forming one army. Caesar took three of these camps in succession.
la Nuperiore corporis parte nudata, i. e. having laid aside the thorax, or coveting for the breast, according to Hotomann.
3. Caul. Supply tuba, “ with the trumpet,” for canere is used no less of musical instruments than of sounds produced by the human voice Receptui canere, or receptui signum dare, is “ to give' the signal for a retreat.” (Schmitt*)
Pectoris fine prominentes, “thrusting their bodies, as far as tha lower part of the bosom, over the wall.”
21» Avaricensibus praemiis, i. e. by the rewards which Caesar had given to his soldiers at Avaricum.
Ii, i. e. Galli.
Convenerant. See cap. 44.
Oppidum .... teneri, this accusative, with the infinitive, de- pends upon the preceding word nunciis.
Obtestari. Supply “that they might fight bravely against the Romans.”
Spatio pugnae, “ by the long continuance of the fight.”
Minoribus castris. See cap. 36.
3. Terreret. Supply eos or hostes; the quo minus is the same as Ut so minusy
D. Ab latere nostris aperto, “on the side where our flanks were exposed or open.” r
Exsertis, i. e. vestibus nudatis, “laid bare.” The Gauls, in tims of peace, used to have their shoulders and breasts uncovered.
18. Excidere. Some read ««scindere.
26. Ctuem, refers to ego, implied in meat vitae.
Intolerantius, “ too impetuously or eagerly.”
83. Exceperunt, “ relieved or auefamed.” ,
GoogkBOOK VH.
hf
36« Infestis signis* Schmitz says these words are almost the 152 same as conversis signis, “ they tamed against the enemy and made a stand.”
1 • Ipsi, the nominative, “ they themselves having taken upon them- J53 selves to judge what was to be done, instead of leaving that judgment to others.”
3* Recipiendi. Supply sui or ee.
4* Exposito, ablative absolute, “ after he had explained.” See Z.
$ 647.
12* Plus .... sentire, “ that they had a better insight or knowledge”
13* Modestiam* In the case of a soldier, modestia is “ obedience,” or “ the keeping within the limits of the orders given by the commander.”
Cf. Livy, xxxviii. 24. (Schmitz.)
16* Ad extremum, “ at the conclusion.”
19* Eadem de profectione cogitans, scii ad Aeduos. See cap. 43.
22* Atque eo, “ and that a successful one.” Atque has here explanatory power.
23* Reduxit, i. e. Caesar.
28* Appellatus* The verb appellare has here the sense of alloqui or adire.
3 2* Admaturari* This is a rare form, on the analogy of adamare, addubitare, and similar verbs. The preposition ad strengthens the meaning, so that admaturari is equivalent to valde maturari, “ to accelerate greatly.”
36* Q,uos == quales.
39* (Quamque in amplitudinem. The Segusiani, Ambivareti, Brannovii, Aulerci, Brannovices, Boii, and Mandubii were at this time clients of the Aedui.
2* Gratiam* In an active sense, gratia is “ influence” or “ power.”
1O* Cognovissent* Cognoscere is “ to collect information about a thingbut as at the same time it contains the idea of “ learning” or “ discovering,” it is followed by the accusative with the infinitive. Sense:
“ When they had gathered information about the condition of the state, and learned that,” &c. (Schmitz.)
16* Custodibus, scil. Romanis.—Quique, i. e. et iis Romanis qui.
17* Itineris causa, “ led by a journey,” or “ in consequence of a journey.”
21* Ctuod subito, &c. Quod has the meaning of tantum quantum, “ as much as they could.”
26* Aut adductos .... expellere* These words are bracketed by seme editors, and rejected by others. Schmitz has the following note; adductos excludere possent, i. e. “ whether they could, by want of provisions, prevent them from returning, or cut off their return, to the Province.”
28* Ex nfvtbus, “ by the melting of the snows.”
2$
Digitized by GoogleNOTES.
F»<«
164 33« Ut. Ut ia here in the sense of “granting that,” “supposing that,” &c.
34. Id nemo .... existimabat. This is the reading of Morus. Others have ut nemo non tune.... existimabat.
Abjuncto. Schmitz pronounces thiB a rare word, having the same meaning as sejunctus or separatus.
155 *>ro ^ necessitate, “ considering the urgency of the case.”
13. Tamen. According to Schmitz, tamen refers to the idea of quamvis, which is contained in the participle confectus.
18. Impediret. The verb here signifies “ to render a place impedi- tus or difficult to pass.”
SO. Vineas. See note, p. 46, line 28.
Confleri, i. e. confici. In composition, facere very rarely makes the passive fieri. Cf. Livy, v. 50; Cicero ad Fam. iv. 5, ad Att. ix. 8. (Schmitz.)
33. Vigilia. See note,p. 18, line 23.
33. Lutetiam diximus, scii, positam esse.
Eo, i. e. iis, viz. navibus.
Secundo flumine, i. e. “ down the river.”
33. Profecti. Some read protecti.
Secundo, “successful.”
Itinere et Ligeri, i. e. transitu Ligeris, “ from crossing the Liger.”
150 7. Bellovaci .... virtutis. See Bk. II. 4.
Maximum flumen, i. e. the Sequana, at this time much swollen by the melting of the snow.
Adverso flumine, “ up the river,” or “ against the current of the river,” the opposite of secundo flumine.
36. Ut. It is here almost the same as quum, and may be rendered “ as.”
28. Exercitus = peditatus, “ the infantry,” which composed the main part of the army.
Tumultuari. It is here used in a passive sense; for verbs called deponents, are not unfrequently employed in a passive sense. So, Apul. Met. 4, p. 71. Magnanimi ducis vigore venerato: 11, p. 239. There is a large number of verbs of this kind, and it is probable that all deponents were in their primitive use passives originally: see Perizonius ad Sand. Min. 3, 2, p. 318. Hence they formerly said tumultuare, as we are informed by 6.. J. Vossius, Anal. 3, 7, who, cap. 6, has collected a long list of deponents used passively. (Davies.)
Metiosedum. Probably the modern Mardon, south of Paris: others suppose it to be identical with Corbeil.
157 Praesentem adesse, an emphatic mode of expressing his presence : “ he bade them act as if Caesar were present in person.”
Q,uum, “ although.”
Tempore. Tempus is here “the decisive or critical moment”
Digitized by Google291
3*. Neque = sed non. Cf Bk. IV. 26.	157
28. Augetur. Other tribes, following the example of the Aedui, endeavored to shake off the yoke of the Romans.
Ad. Before ad supply tantum, corresponding with quantum
preceding.	•
Nactl obsides. These hostages had been given to Caesar by the other states of Gaul, and had been left by him with the Aedui. See cap. 55.
Ad se veniat, soil. ut.
1111s, viz. the Remi and the Lingones.
3. Requirunt, " regret, feel the loss of,” dtc. Requirunt = desi-158 derant vel amissam sentiunt. (Clarke.)
lO. Hue, i. e. ad hoc or ad hanc rem
Neque = neque etiam or et non.
Provinciae, scii. Romanae.
Superiore bello* This was nine years before, when the Allobroges had been conquered and rendered subject to the Romans. Cf Bk.
I. 6.—Resedisse. The verb residere is “ to settle down,” or “ to become appeased.”
28. Ad s= contra, “ against all these emergencies.”
30. Ij. Caesare. This was a relative of Julius Caesar; but, belonging to the opposite party, (the aristocratic,) he went over to the side of Pompey when the civil war broke out. He was consul B. C. 64.
Sed et equitibus Romanis atque evocatis. Sed et or sed 15Q etiam generally follow after the negative non solum or non tantum; in this passage, the negative, though not expressed, is implied in the preceding clause, “ not only from the tribunes of the soldiers, but also from the Roman equitesthe Roman equites here are not common horsemen, but persons of equestrian rank. The evocati are men who had already served their time, but, to oblige a general, and derive further benefit, again engaged as soldiers. (Schmitz.)
Reliqui, i. e.futuris.—Parum profici, “little was gained.”
16. Adoriantur. It depends upon some verb denoting “to admonish” or “ advise,” which is implied in the preceding demonstrat.— Pedites, scil. Romani.
18. Magis futurum, “ would rather be the case.”
De equitibus hostium. These words must be connected with the verb dubitare, though, instead of de equitibus, Caesar might also have used the genitive equitum, governed by nemo, and afterwards have omitted the pronoun eorum. (Schmitz.)
Una, “ at one and the same time.”
3T. Spe auxilii: because they knew well that if they were pressed too heavily, Caesar would assist them.
Flumen. This was the Arar, modem Sa6ne; others say, the Sequana.
Cotus, Ac. Respecting Cotus and Convictolitania, see cap. 33,160
Google382
F*f«
16039, though the Eporedix here mentioned c&nuot be the same as the one who is spoken of in cap. 54; he may have been his father, or even his grandfather. (Schmitz.)
11* Ut, “ as, or in the same manner.”
18* Equitati* Schmitz terms this an ablative of limitation, limiting the general assertion of their being put to flight (erant pulsi) to the cavalry.
21* In colle summo, “on the top of the hill.” Editus locus describes the nature of the hill as very high.
S3* Flumina* These were the Lutosa and Osera, the modem La Lose and Le Lozerain.
24* Sanctissimo jurejurando ... ne tecto recipiatur, &c. “ So bad was the aspect of affairs, that Caesar fell back upon the Roman province. The army of the Gauls -pursued and overtook him. They had sworn that they would never behold house, family, wives, or children, until they had twice broken through the enemy’s lines. The contest was terrible. Caesar was forced to run the utmost personal risk, was nearly taken, and his sword remained in the hands of the enemy. However, a charge of his German cavalry struck a panic terror into the Gauls, and decided the victory.” Michelet’s History of France, vol. I. p. 49.
29* Maceriam. Maceria or maceries is a wall made of stones and bricks, with earth between them; but no mortar was used; whence such walls seem to have derived their name from macer. Praeducere is “ to build or construct in front of.” (Schmitz.)
30* Munitionis, i. e. fossae et valli. “ circumvallation.”
31* Tenebat* It is here used as a neuter verb, and almost equivalent to eratf whence the genitive XI millium passuum.
32* Castella = “ redoubts or forts.”—Quibus in castellis. This repetition is not uncommon in Caesar
36. Opere* The opus is the circumvallatio mentioned in cap. 69.
37* Intermissam, “ situate in the midst of,” or “ surrounded by.”
161	*•	Angustioribus portis relictis* Oudendorp’s explanation is this ;
because none but narrow gates were left (reliquae,) by which they canid enter. The larger gates seem to have been obstructed by the ditch (fossa) and the mound (maceria.) Many think that the word relictis is inserted by some mistake of the transcribers, but it is found in all the texts.— Coarctantur has the reflective meaning of sese coarctant, just as promoveri is used in the sense of se promovere.
16* Dimittere for dimittendi. This is in imitation of the Greek construction.
20* Q,uod si* The words are nearly the same as si alone; sometimes they may be rendered by “ if therefore.” The quod is added to si for the purpose of connecting the sentence more closely with the preceding one. (Schmitz.)
22* Ratione inita, “ after a calculation was made.”—Exigue ® parum or vix% “ scarcely.”	'
Google203
P«ga
5W. Intermissum, i. e/at a point where the Roman works or cir- 161 cumvallation had not yet been finished.
Directis lateribus, “with straight sides;” that is, the sides or banks of the ditch, and consequently the ditch itself also, formed straight lines. (Schmitz.)—Ut = ita ut. Caesar here describes a ditch, the sides or banks of which are perpendicular, so that the ditch is as broad at the bottom as at the upper end (labra) of the banks.
36. Passus CD. Achaintre and others read pedes CD.—Reduxit,
“ withdrew,” i. e. towards the city.—Id, scil .fecit.
3 7. Totum corpus, the whole body or whole extent of fortifications. Militum corona is “ a circle of soldiers,” or “ the soldiers stationed all around the fortifications to guard them.”
1. Destinatos. Much the same as intentus. It may be construed either with the dative or the preposition ad.
4. Post eas, “ behind these,” i. e. nearer to the city.
.5. Loricam. It is here a coating of boards, with iron or wooden points in it. It seems to have been the same as what in cap. 25 is called platens. Respecting the pinnae, see note, p. 102, line 15.
Cervis. The cervi are trunks of trees presenting the appearance of forks, the branches not being entirely cut off, so that they resembled the horns of stags, (cervi.) They were placed in front of a ditch or rampart, so as to prevent the enemy approaching. The commissurae are the joints between the boards or stones. (Schmitz.)
Turres. These were fixed or stationary. Cf. note, p. 46, line 32.
Abscissis. Many prefer abscisis.—Atque horum, sc\\. truncorum et fermorum ramorum.
Perpetuae fossae, “ a continued trench.”
Illi stipites, scii, trunci et firmi rami.—Demissi, “sunk into the ground and well fastened at the lower end.” The whole trunk was concealed in the ground, and they were visible only from the point where the branches began.
Se . . .. induebant, “ they became entangled in the sharp palisades, (valli.)” The dative vallis is the same as inter vallos.
Scrobes. These, says Schmitz, are holes in the earth of the form of a wine-glass, broad at the top and ending below in a point, which is here called infimum fastigium.
Huc, i. e. in hos scrobes.
Lilium. The fortification here spoken of consisted of several rows of pits, sloping like the cup of a lily, from which a sharp stake projected.—Taleae, staves or sticks of small size.
3 7. Parcs ejusdem generis. This is thought by some to be a pleonasm, but, as Dr. Schmitz remarks, it is not really so, since things may be of the same kind (ejusdem generis) in form, but yet are not pares in size and strength.
Exteriorem hostem. These were the forces which the cavalry sent out by Vercingetorix might bring to his aid.
25*
Google294
r«f«
162	discessu,	vix.	of	the	cavalry or hostis exterior. Some refer
ejue to Caeear, but wrongly.
Ut censuit Vercingetorix* See cap. 71.
8* Frumentandi rationem, “ any mode of supplying com."
28* Demonstravimus* Compare Bk. IV. 21.
Immuncm, exempt from the tribute required by the Romans from conquered nations.
3 7* Numerusque in ibatur, viz. eorum,M their number was counted.”
Administraretur. The imperfect is used, because the leading verb attribuuntur, is an historical present instead of a perfect.
5• Aucipiti proelio. Cf. note, p. 25, line 1. It here means a twofold or double battle with foes both in front and rear.
Eruptione, i. e. eruptione facta.
8. Praeterita die = quum dies praeteriisset. See cap. 71.
Apud quos = in quo concilio. The quos refers to the persons of whom the concilium consisted.
Deditionem .... eruptionem. Supply faciendam.
Ista. It is in apposition with the clause inopiam paulisper, &c., but agreeing in gender with the predicate mollities.
Dignitas, authority, influence, &c.
27m Q,uid .... animi, “ what degree of courage,” or “ what state of feeling will they be in ?”
Spoliare. Oudendorp reads exspoliare.
3 2. Nec. If connected with nolite preceding, wo have a double negative, in imitation of the Greek. We may, however, supply velites, taken out of nolite, which is itself equivalent to ne velitis.
An. Here, as in many other cases, an introduces the second part of a double question, the first being understood and implied in what precedes.
36. Animi causa, “for the sake of amusement.”
3 7. IUoruin, i. e. the Gauls whom they were expecting to come to their relief.
Hs, i. e. the Romans.
Vitam toleraverunt, “maintained their lives.” From this it appears that the Gauls, at the time of the invasion of the Cimbri and Teutones, when they were blockaded in their towns, fed upon the corpses of the aged and of their children. For the date, Cf note, p. 29, line 12.
Depopulata, a participle of a deponent verb used passively. See note, p. 156, line 32.
14. Injungere servitutem. The expression is much harsher than imponere servitutem; it implies severity and permanence, being taken from the yoking of cattle to the plough. (Schmitz.)
18. Securibus subjecta. Reference is to the proconsular authority. These officers were attended by twelve lictors, who carried “ axes” and rods (fasces) as emblems of the powers of the governor of a Roman province. “ A Gaulish chief, while exhorting his countrymen to maintain
Googld205
Paf*
their independence against the arms of Rome, is represented by Caesar |g5
as describing in two words the degraded condition of that part of Gaul which was already a Roman province. He called it subjecta securibus,
‘ subject to the lictor’s axe and though the last extremities of tyranny might have been comparatively rare, yet in fact the lives of the provincials were subject to the arbitrary will of the governors, without any immediate protection, and too often with only a feeble prospect of retribution upon their oppressor.” See Arnold’s Later Roman Commonwealth, p. 158; where is detailed a shocking instance of the wretched condition of the countries subject to the Roman yoke.
20. Sint* Some read sunt.
Utendum* Supply esse sibi.
Demonstravimus. See cap. G9.	y
Abditas, i. e. separatas or remotas, that their number might not be perceived. Some read abductas.
Se . . . . comparant = se praeparant, or simply se parant. 166
4. Si usus veniat, i. e. si opus esse incipiat, “if there should be any
necessity,” usus being the moment of time when use is to be made of something. Cf. Bk. IV. 2; V. 15. (Schmitz.)
Ex omnibus castris, i. e. from all parts of the camp.
8. Eventum. Many read proventum, which is equivalent in meaning.
Ab his, i. e. sagittariis, &c.—Complures, scii, nostrorum equitum.
14. Q,ui munitionibus continebantur, i. e. those who were in the
town.
IT. Utrosque. Supply ef, corresponding with the preceding neque.
20. Una in parte, i. e. in a part different from that where the battle was fought.
28. Harpagonum. These were long poles with strong iron hooks at the end, for the purpose of pulling down either the walls themselves, or any thing erected upon the walls for the purpose of protecting the soldiers of the besieged. (Schmitz.)
29m Campestres munitiones, scii, exteriores, those which had been erected against the Gauls.
30. Ctua significatione, i. e. ut ea significatione .... possent.
32m Projicere, deturbare, administrare, descriptive infinitives.
Definitus, i. e. attributus, “ assigned.”
3T« Fundis, librilibus* Some have libralibus, which lection may be confirmed from Vegetius, 2, 3: Libralia saxa; but Festus defends the received reading: Librilia appellantur instrumenta bellica, saxa scilicet ad brachii crassitudinem in modum flagellorum loris revincta. Hence we must distinguish between fundis and librilibus, as LipsitiS also thought, Poliorc. 4, 3, and so we find in the MS. Brant, and the Greek version: Z1>tv66vats, ftcyd\ot$ rt	(Davies.)	In no MS. does a appear; but all
my MSS., the MSS. Ciacc., and the early editions have librilibus, except that the word is absent from the MS. Cujac. See also Pareus, Lex. CriL 677. (Oudendorp.)
GoogleNOTES.
38* Glandibus* See note, p. 103, line 10.
167 »• 8e ... . induebant* See note, p. 162, line 21.
IO* Appeteret* See note, p. 125, line 36.
12* Interiores, i. e. those in the town.
14* Priores, a nominative, says Schmitz, before which et must be supplied.
37* Opinionem* It has here a passive meaning, “ who were believed to be most valorous.”
38* Q,uld quoque paeto, “ what was to be done, and in what manner it was to be done.”
29* Adeundi, i. e. appropinquandi or egrediendi, viz. castra.
33* Ea castra .... demonstravimus, viz. the superiora castra, or the camp on the hill. ,
Jgg 1* A castris* See cap. 69. Vercingetorix had encamped before the town.—Musculos. These were sheds or roofs, under the protection of which the soldiers might make an attack upon the walls or ramparts of a place.
7• Pugnantibus, dative, depending on exstitit. Caesar might, says Schmitz, have used the genitive dependent upon tergum, but it would have been less expressive.
8* In aliena virtute, Ac., i. e. they perceived that their own danger consisted in the valor of the enemies in their rear, and their safety in the cowardice of those same enemies, though their shouts did not seem to indicate that they were cowards. (Schmitz.)
12* Ad animum occurrit, i. e. in mentem venit, “ it occurred to them, or to their minds.”'
14. Rem obtinuerint* The expression, rem obtinuere, is a general one, denoting here the same as victoriam referre, “ to carry off the victory.”
Exiguum loci, Ac., i. e. loci fastigium, quamvis exiguum, tamen ob declivitatem magnum habet momentum, “ an eminence, though not very high, is yet of great importance.” Ad is the same as quod attinet ad, " in regard to,” or “ on account of.” (Schmitz.)
18* Alii, scii. Galli.
30* Praerupta ex ascensu, i. e. steep from the point where the ascent begins.
31* Propugnantes, scil. Romanos.
34* Brutum* This was probably Decimus Brutus.
169 »• Vestitus* The color of a general’s cloak was scarlet, with a purple stripe in front The words following in parentheses are rejected by some editors; they seem intended to show that Caesar was not afraid of exposing his person in cases of extreme danger.
11* Excipit* Supply hunc clamorem, to be taken out of the preceding ablative absolute.
13* Post tergum, scii. Gallorum.—Equitatus, scii. Romanorum.
, Digitized I Google297
p«*t
22« Fuissent defessi. Schmitz reads essent defessi, and refers to IgQ Z. § 525.
Necessitatum. These are connections of friendship or relation* ship.
Vercingetorix deditur. “ The Vercingetorix alone, preserving his firmness of mind in the midst of general despair, markedly delivered himself up as the sole mover of the war, clad in his rich armor, and wheeling round the tribunal of Caesar, cast his sword, casque, and javelin at the foot of the Roman, without uttering a word.” (See Plutarch, Fit* Caes. cap. 27; Dio Cassius, 40, 41: this latter author relates that Ver- ciugetorix, after having been led in triumph at Rome, was put to death in prison.) Michelet’s History of France, vol. i. p. 49.
Civitates recuperare, “ to recover the friendship and good-will of the states.”
36. Toto exercitu, “in the whole army,” the ablative being used instead of per totum exercitum, “ throughout the army.” Singula capita are individuals: “ he gave one captive to each of his soldiers.” (Schmitz.)
38. Recipit, scil. in deditionem et fidem.
4. Attribuit, viz. as an assistant in case of Labienus being obliged to YfQ leave his post
Supplicatio. See note, p. 55, line 15. “ During the present summer, Caesar had in fact completed the conquest of Gaul, by the defeat of the formidable confederacy organized by Vercingetorix and by the cap- • ture of Alesia. By his successive victories he had amassed a treasure, which, if we may judge by the effects ascribed to it, must have been enormous	To his own army his liberalities were almost unbounded, while
his camp presented a place of refuge to the needy, the profligate, the debtore, and even the criminals who found it convenient to retreat from the capital. When it is remembered that the object of all this profusion was the enslaving of his country, and that the means which enabled him to practise it were derived from the unprovoked pillage of the towns and temples of Gaul, and the sale of those unfortunate barbarians, who in the course of his unjust wars became his prisoners, it may be justly doubted whether the life of any individual recorded in history, was ever productive of a greater amount of human misery, or has been marked with a deeper stain of wickedness.” Arnold’s Later Roman Commonwealth, p. 224.