Ea hieme, abl, of time, “ when.”
aui. Tlie pronoun is attracted into agreement in gender with the predicate : of. Bk. v. eh. xlix. 2, and contrast Bk. v. eh. xl. 18.
annus, 53 n.c.
Germani an adjective.
transierant. Ctesar almost invariably uses this form of the 3rd plnr. perf. act., and very seldom tlie alternative form in -err.
non longe	influit, “not far from the mouth of tlie Rhine/’
quo. Latin is essentially an accurate language. Here quo,
“ whither,” is used, and not ubi, “ where,” because, of the idea of motion in influit.
causa, nom., “the reason of their crossing was that . . .” When causa in abl. is used as a preposition, it always follows its case.
complures annos, aec. of duration of time.
bello. In Latin, ideas are expressed very definitely. In English we should merely say “hard pressed.” So “ pain " — dolor corporis {mentis), “nature” = natura rerum, “crushed” (heartbroken) =fractus animo: defining words being used in Latin.
agri cultura, abl. of separation.
8. Hi, tlie Suebi.NOTES, BOOK IV.
S.	centum pagos. Tacitus describes the Semnones, a section of the Suebi, as being divided into a hundred “cantons ” (tlrrm., eh. xx.vix.) The division probably took place in each fresh settlement.
it quotannis, sometimes written in two words. It is a shortened expression for the full “lot minis qnot sunt'’; ef. quo/ mensibus, “every month.’’
singula inilia, distributive, “a thousand each year.’’
reliqui	remanent. Horace gives the same account of the
Scythians—
See ru’/nm place/, hnuiior annua,
Itefanc/iniu/ue lahari/ms Aequo U recreat no etc vicarius.
— Oil. iii. 21.
manserunt. Th t :rf. and pluperf. indicative are used with cum, si, n/ii, quoties, fit iterative or repeated action in primary and secondary sequence respectively.
in vicem, “in turn”; distributive use of in; cf. Ilk. v. eh.
XXX. 1.
ratio atque usus, “science and practice.” The two nouns form one idea, contrasted with agri cultura. Hence atque, and not nee, and the singular verb intermittitur.
agri, partitive gen., dependent on nihil. We might say “private landed property.”
Io. maximam partem, “for the most part” ; adverbial accusative, variously classed under ace. of extent and acc. of reference or respect ; cf. multum in the same sentence. Similar uses of the acc. are cetera, “ as for the rest ” ; id t< mporls, “ at that time ” ; id ijcnus, “of that kind”; secus virile, muliebre, “of the male” or “female sex.” See L. P., § 213.
lacte atque pecore, abl. of means.
res, “this fact.” Beware of translating “»vs” always by “thing” or “affair.” It is a general word constantly used where we should employ a special term. It takes its meaning from the context. It has been compared to a blank cheque to be tilled in at pleasure. “Considerations,” “circumstances,” “aim," “juncture,” “result,” are common meanings that it hears.
genere	faciunt, “owing to their diet, daily exercise, and
freedom of life (for from boyhood, not having been schooled by duty and training, they do nothing at all against their will)”; the cr.ni clause is explanatory of libertate vitae.
IS. a pueris, so in Greek, in ualSmi’, “from boys.”cjesar's gallic war.
10. immani . . . magnitudine, abl. of description or quality; like the similar genitive, never used without an epithet or the equivalent of an epithet. The phrase here is predicative.
Atque, “and further,” introduces a new and important fact or idea.
eam se consuetudinem. In English, when we wish to emphasise words, we are sometimes compelled to resort to the clumsy method of italics. In Latin, emphasis is effectively given by order. A very common way is to take some unimportant word like cst, sc, esse, is, &c., and place it between words which naturally go together. Here se, by its position between earn and consuetudinem, adds emphasis to them. Examples arc very numerous : c.ij. below, magna est corporis pars; eh. iii. 0, Gallicis punt morihns assuefacti; ch. v. 0, de summis saepe relms. Trans.: “they have so thoroughly inured themselves.”
locis frigidissimis, abl. abs. with concessive sense, “ though the climate be extremely cold.”
neque . . . et, “not . . . and besides”; cf. ch. xxix. 11.
vestitus, partitive gen. with quicquam.
haberent . . . lavarentur, irregular sequence after adduxerunt, which clearly here has a perfect and not an aorist force; haheaut . . . laventur would have been more natural. The probable explanation of this and any similar irregularity is that as the Latin perfect so constantly had an aorist force, the imperf. subjunct. was used after it occasionally, when it had its strictly perfect meaning.
Chapter II.
Mercatoribus	desiderent. “Access (or perhaps ‘an open
door ’) is granted to traders rather with a view to having purchasers (or a ‘market’) for the booty they have taken in war than from a desire of any import trade.”
quae . . . quibus, supply as antecedents ta governed by vendant, and cos governed by habeant.
ceperint, subjunct. duo to quae, generic or restrictive (see App. II.), “such things as.”
vendant, final subjuget, quibus = «/ eis (see App. II.)
quam quo . . . desiderent, virtually oblique subjunct. of alleged cause. The reason given is not the real one, but one that might be attributed (see App. II.)
quam and the comparative are equivalent in sense to a nega-NOTES. BOOK IV.
tive, so that the phrase is virtually the same as the ordinary von quo, “not because.” On the same principle quisquam, which is only used after a negative, can follow quam and a comparative.
desiderent here means merely “ desire.” Another and more common meaning is “ feel the loss of,” “ miss.”
Quin etiam, “nay more.” Sometimes quin is used alone in this sense.
Galli. Many of the words in Latin connected with horses are Celtic—r.fj., essedum, cochins, “war-chariot”; petorritum, raeda, “a t	travelling-carriage,”	and	others.	In	some	of	them	we	can detect
common Celtic words lurking. Petorritum, which means “four- wheeled,” contains the Celtic word for “four”: Welsh, pedirar; Cornish, perirar; Breton, perar,
impenso, lit. “ profusely expended”; hence “lavish,” “great.” i	G. ut sint . . . efficiunt, “ they render them.”
summi ut . . . laboris. Summi, by being placed before ut and separated from laboris, is made very emphatic. The genitive is that of quality or description (see on eh. i. 10, for the ablative). The genitive is used rather of general qualities, the ablative of special characteristics and personal features. Both are used of mental qualities.
7. Equestribus proeliis, in omitted, as often ; cf. eodem vestigio below, and more often than not with locus.
pedibus, “on foot.” The ablative is instrumental.
S.	eodem . . . vestigio, “in the same spot.”
JO. moribus, “according to their customs.” Mores, the plural, also means “character,” because “habits” form “character.” habetur, “is held,” “considered.”
ephippiis, a Creek word (i<f>Uma), “ horse-cloths,” “housings.”
ad, “against.”
quemvis, like quilibet, “any you please.” Distinguish these from tjuisijuam and ullus, which mean “any” after a negative or the equivalent : non quiris hoc jacere potest = “not ereri/ one can do it ” ; non quisquam hoc facere potest — " no one can do it.”
quamvis pauci, “however few.” Qnamris is used thus with an adjective, and also as a relative adverb (“although”), with the subjnnct.
Vinum	arbitrantur. Ciesar records the same of the Nervii,
a warlike Belgic tribe (l)k. ii. ch. xv.)
omnino . . . non patiuntur, "altogether refuso to allow.”1. Publice, “ as a nation.”
quam — agros, “that as wide a tract of country as possible, stretching from their borders, should be waste land.
4. a Suebis, “in the direction of the Suebi”; a very common use of a, ah ; cf. the phrases a tenjo, a lutere, a fronte, ah areasu, ah oriente, a septentrionibus, a meridie, kc.
centum. Some editors read sescenta, an incredible statement, as this distance would comprise the whole of Southern Germany, agri, nom. plur., subject of dicuntur.
f>. succedunt, “come close up.” For this use of suh, cf. sub noctem, “at nightfall” ; suh vallum, “close up to the rampart.”
(5. ut est captus Germanorum, “ as far as the capacity of the Germans allows.” Captus is a noun.
eiusdem generis, the German race.
multuni, adverbial, as in eh. i. In. Below we have multo. The difference is that multum is used with verbs, multo with com. paratives (an abl. of measure).
10. moribus, abl., as officio in ch. i. 13. cum, concessive, “although.”
humiliores infirmioresque, predicative, "reduced them to a state of far greater dependence and weakness.”
Chapter IV.
causa, “case,” “position.” It is from this use of causa that the French chose, which is derived from it, gets its meaning.
supra. Ch. i. 2.
diximus. Notice the transitive use of i/ico with accusative in sense of “mention.” It may be well here to give a warning about verbs which in grammars are said to “take a dative.” No verb really “takes a dative.” Either the verb is transitive in English and intransitive in Latin, as noero tihi, “I hurt you”—lit. — “I am hurtful to you” (so pureo, “I am sparing”; pareo, “I am obedient”), or, more frequently, what in English seems the direct object is in Latin the indirect. For instance, impero is a transitive verb, and 33 such takes an accusative — impero obsides, “I demand hostages”; impero hoe, “I order this” ; but, as usual, the indirect object is in the dative— impero tihi, “I order [this to] you.” So credo me tihi, “I entrust myself to you”; credo tibi, “I trust [to]
























72	CVES All's GALLIC WAll.
IS. confecto, abl. al»'. with omni hoc itinere.
17. occupatis, “seized.” Occupo does not mean “ to occupy.” prius quam and antequam, like dnm, </uott.il, are often used with tlie sulijunct., even of a fact that is past, because of the idea of purpose lurking in them (see App. II.)
‘20. so eorum. Se is put out of its natural order for the sake of emphasising the contrast between the two pronouns, copiis, “ by means of their supplies.”
Chapter V.
infirmitatem, “instability.”
in consiliis capiendis mobiles, “impulsive.” novis . . . rebus, “change.” Generally the phrase means
“revolution.” Notice the emphatic order.
nihil . . . committendum, “ought to place no reliance on them.”
Est	consuetudinis, “there is also this point in Gallic
custom.” ComudntUnii is partitive gen. Cf. ut temporii, “at that time.”
uti. Besides the ordinary final and committee uses of ut with thesubjunet. there are two others, (a) substantival, as here, introducing a clause that is practically equivalent to a substantive ; (b) concessive, “granted that,” a comparatively rare use.
The Gauls were like the Athenians (Acts xvii. 21), who “spent their time in nothing else but either to tell or to hear some now thing.” For an example of this credulity see Bk. vi. ch. xx. Martial (v. i. 10) uses (talla (— Oallkti) credulitas as a proverbial expression.
quid . . . audierit . . . cognoverit, indirect questions. Some editions read quod. In this ease the clause would be relative, “whatever eaeh may have heard.”
quaque. Always look carefully to see whether such a form is a part of ipiistpie, as here, or the pronoun with que attached, as quibusque, quasque, just below.
quaerant . . . circumsistat . . . cogat, constructed with uti.	*
quibusque . . . quasque, indirect questions dependent on pronuntiare.
pronuntiare. Remember that co</o is constructed with the infinitive, and not with ut and subjunet,
His	respondeant. “Under the excitement of these factsN0TK8, HOOK' IV.
and rumours they often form decisions on matters of the highest importance, of which they are compelled to repent on the spot: for they are the slaves of unconfirmed reports, and in most eases people invent answers to suit their wishes.”
auditionibus, “hearsay.”
eos, governed hy the impersonal paenitere.
paenitere necesse est. A’m-.w ent has three alternative constructions—	r	ut	ran
nremne ml -J tun I =you must go.
( tihl hr J
plerique, i.f., most of the traders.
ficta, aec. after respondeant (see on eh. iv. 2).
ClIAPTKR Vf.
ne	occurreret, “that lie might not find the war more
serious” or “a more serious war.” Notice this latter way of translating the predicative adjective.
consuerat = conn ue tv rat.
13.	Eo	cognovit, “on his arrival he found his suspicions
realised.”
facta, sc. ensr, as with missas and invitatos below.
missas = missas cw, dependent on the idea of cognovit continued.
f>. discederent—i.f., farther into Gaul.
omnia, quae postulassent, ab se fore parata. The Gauls said to the Germans, “ Omnia t/nar jiostidarcrilis mint jini'iita.” Contrast the laxity of our English tense-usage in temporal sentences with tiie accuracy of the Latin. When the Komans said “shall have asked,” we should say simply “ask.” Postulassent is suhohlique snbjunct. •See App. If.
fore parata, fut. perf. infill, pass. The infinitive is dependent on some veil) of “saying” understood from invitatos, “had been invited to . . . and assured that all,” &c.
Qua spe, English idiom, “hope q/'ihis.”
S.	clientes, a dependent state, supplying soldiers and paying tribute in return for protection.
!). cognoverat. The fact that this is not in the suboldiqnc sub- junct. shows that it was not a part of Cicsar's thought at the time, hut was added by him when writing to explain ea.
dissimulanda, sc. enne, I.enicniber the difference between shunto and dissimulo: quod non es, simulas; dissimutanque quod es.In ea loca . . . quibus in locis. Ctesar is fond of this somewhat stilted kind of repetition. It merely = “ these places where.”
Germanos	venisse. Trans, into or. red.: “We Germans
are not aggressively attacking the Homans, yet at the same time we do not, if provoked, shrink from fighting, as it is a traditional custom with ns to offer resistance to aggression and not to beg for peace. But what we do say is this, that we have come,” &c.
priores . . . inferre. Cf. ultimus reni, “I was the last to come” ; primus abii, “ I was the first to go.”
recusare . . . quin, " shrink from fighting.” Quin is made up of tpii, old abl. =7no, and n—nc, negative. See App. II.
G. amis contendant. See on bello, ch. i. 5.
8. deprecari, “ cry off,” “ beg for mercy.”
dicere, sc. se as subject; also with posse, below.
utiles esse amicos, emphatic order (sec on ch. i. 20 : “ We can be useful friends to you”).
attribuant, jussive snbjunct. All through this piece of or. obi. the primary sequence is used for sake of vividness.
possederint. There are two cognate words, possideo, “I am master of,” and possido, "I become master of,” both of which make perfect possedi. The tense here shows that the word in the text is from possido.
13. reliquum . . . neminem, emphatic order, “there was absolutely no one else. ” 1. Mosa . . . Vosego. As a matter of fact, the Maine rises from the plateau of Lamjren, which was probably included in the ancient Vosegus, The modern Vomjcn mountains arc N.E. of the Lingones, whose name survives in Lani/ren.
3. insulam, formed by the Mine, Waal, Maine, and Ocean—i.c., the Rhine delta.
neque longius=ef non-lonyitis, the negative belonging only to
I	longius.
inde—/.e., from the Ocean, the North Sea. milibus=qvam milibiin. After ampliim, p/im, minim, with numerals, quam is idiomatically omitted. Milibus here is not abl. of comparison but abl. of measure. Cf. ch. xii. 2, .vlmx* non uiaplius I	actimje/itos = )ion ampliun quam octimjenton.CJESAU S GALLIC WAR.
fi. Lepontiis. The name of the people is treated as that of a place.
longo spatio, “ for a long distance” ; the aid. of measure is here used for the ace. of extent, as not unfrequently, tho two being akin in meaning. “Tho town is ten miles distant” can be translated either by decem India or decent mildms, nitent, according as either tho intervening space or the measure of distance is considered.
citatus, “ with a fast current.”
Oceano. The dative is due to the idea of “nearness ” in adpro- pinquavit, and is not tho dative expressing “motion to,” which is common in poetry but rare in prose.
multis	effectis, “forming many large islands.” Ono of tho
great deficiencies in Latin is that it has no perfect participle active. The pass. part, in abl. abs. lias to be used to express the idea, but in translating uso the Emjlish idiom. Notice, too, that in English we loosely uso tho presott where tho more accurate Latin uses the punt tense. There is another difference in idiom between the two languages to be observed in this sentence, multis in<icntibu*q\ie = “many great.”
nationibus, “tribes,” a much smaller division than our “nations.”
piscibus atque ovis, aid. of means, “on fish and eggs.”
existimantur, “to whom belong those (well-known people) who are thought,” Ac. ; Cwsar has definite people in his mind, and uses the indicative. Sunt <jni, meaning “some” (i.e., “there arc such as ”), is used with the subjunctive.
capitibus, “mouths,” more generally used of the “source.”
Chapter XI.
non amplius . . . milibus. Quam omitted, as in last chapter. However, it is possible to regard milibus as abl. of comparison=<jnam milia (see note on loni/o spatio in eh. x. f>).
ut erat constitutum. In ch. ix., so far from making any “arrangement” with the envoys for their return, Ctesar seems to have discouraged them.
antecessissent, snboldique subjunct. pugna, abl. of separation.
sibi, emphatic position, with special force. In ch. viii., Ciesar had promised to send to the Ubii, but the Germans ask that they themselves may have the opportunity.
legatos mittendi. With transitive verbs Cicsar generally uses the gerundive construction, and not the gerund ; but he employs theNOTES, BOOK IV.	77
gerund here to avoid the ugly sounding hyntorum mittendorum ; cf. eh. xiv. f>.
quorum	ostendebant, “ if their chiefs and senate gave
them full assurance on oath, they intimated that they would aceept the terms that were offered by Ca'sar.” Carefully compare the dillerenees between English ami Latin idiom and phraseology in.this sentence.
fecisset, singular, in agreement with the nearer of two subjects.
D. tridui spatium, gen. of definition.
10. daret, jussive snbjnnct., “ let him give,” representing direct da. eodem illo, “ tended the same way,” adverbs,
14. quam frequentissimi, “ in as large mmihers as possible.”
convenirent, jussive snbjnnct., “ let them conic,” representing convenite- of the direct speech.
mittit . . . ne. We should say “sends them a message ordering them not to.”
nuntiarent. An historic present, like mittit, can ho used with either primary or secondary sequence,
quoad . . . accessisset, “until lie himself came,” English idiom for “should liavo conic.”
Chaptku XII.
hostes ubi, English idiom, “when the enemy saw . . . they . . In Latin, the subject is put with the jirittripnl verb, and the pronoun supplied with the xnhordiunte. The principal verb, of which hostes is subject, is of course perturbaverunt. The whole of this long sentence is a good example of the beautiful clearness of the Latin arrangement of sentences, with strict regard to the proper sequence of events and ideas.
ubi primum, ‘ ‘ as soon as. ”
V milium, gen. of definition.
cum, “though.”
amplius octingentos. See note on milibus, ch. x. 8.
4. timentibus nostris . . . nostros. As a general rule, if the participial construction can be brought into the construction of the sentence, the abl. abs. is not used. Here nostris might have been omitted and timentibus have been put in agreement with nostros. The variation from the general rule here is accounted for by the separation of timentibus nostris from perturbaverunt. Cf. Bk. v. ch. xliv. 13.C.I-HAIl’rt liALLIl! WAIL
(1. indutiis, “ fora truce,” dat. of purpose or work contemplated, his tlm Ibomans.
H. compluribus uoa 'Is, “our men in many rasos," insto,n! of the inoro natural coni/i/nrihu* r inistri.i, “m-veral of our men,” noster is used by Cicsar as an co^nivivlonb for Uonutnm ; of. oh. xxii. 3.
!». atque, “ ami further.”
ita perterritos egerunt, “so terrified ami routed.” fuga, aid. of separation.
in conspectum, “in sight.” Wherever there is any idea of motion, in must ho used with the ace. Here again Latin is move accurate; sec on oh. xviii. 10.
venisjent, subjunet., due to idea of purpose in prius quam ; see on ch. iv, 17, and App. II.
Id. Piso had prohiihly received his Roman name when lie obtained his citizenship.
14. obtinuerat, “had held.”
amicus. Amint* /m/ndi Itoi)uwi was a title granted by the Roman ,Senate to a foreign prince or chieftain for services rendered, or with a view to secure fidelity. In l>k i. ch. iii. we hear of Catamantaloedis, chief of the Sequani, mentioned as an nminis; in Ilk. i. ch. xxxv., Ariovistus ; and in 15k. vii. ch. xxxi., Ollovico of the Nitobrogos. The title was evidently valued, as l’tolcmy Auletes, King of Egypt, spent considerable sums of money in trying to (ditain it.
16. eripuit . . . restitit. In order to make a narrative more graphic and vivid, or to emphasise an antithesis, a connecting particle is often omitted. This omission is called asyndeton.
C'haptek XIII.
qui . . . intulissent. Even bad the verb not been suboblique, it would have been in the subjunet., owing to qui causal = “ inasmuch as they.”
ultro, “unprovoked.”
exspectare	iudicabat, “ he thought it was the height of
madness to wait until the enemy in re reinfjmd and the cavalry returned. Notice again the difference in English ami Latin idiom in tense usage of the italicised words.
angerentur . . . reverteretur. See on ch. iv. 17.
: onunae dementiae, lit., “a sign ot the highest madness”; goti. of possession used as predicate.
infirmi.'.ru.a—i.e., the instability of character described in oil. v.























C.KSAIt’S GALLIC AVAIL
further truce that they hoped to obtain. Another translation is possible, “ by a misrepresentation of (the infringement of) the truce.” ifl. si quid, lit., “if anything”—<>., “whatever.” So si guamlo, “whenever”; nimbi, “wherever”; sicunde, “from whatever place”; si gun, “by whatever way” ; si gun, “in whatever direction.”
Quos . . . illos. Quos is connective relative — el illos; iliosis therefore unnecessarily inserted.
IS. equitatumque	perterritum. The cavalry had some reason
for fear, inasmuch as (ch. xii.) 5000 of them had been routed by SOO of the enemy.
OlI.WTKR XIV.
Acie triplici, sec Introduction, p. xxvi. . Aeirs is the fighting order of troops, agineu the marching order. Apparently here they marched in lighting order.
 prius . . . quam . . . possent. Sec on ch. iv. 17.
 eonsilii habendi . . . spatio, “ time for taking counsel.” See on dim pugnae, ch. xiii. 10. Notice the difference of construction, eonsilii habendi gerundive, arma capiendi gerund. For explanation, see on eh. xi. 6.
copiasne	praestaret, “whether it were better to lead the
troops against the enemy, or to defend the camp, or to seek safety by means of flight” ; three alternative indirect questions, dependent on perturbantur, “are thrown into a state of perplexity.”
Quorum, connective relative: cum is a conjunction, not a preposition.
pristini diei perfidia, “by yesterday’s treachery.”
Quo loco, in omitted, as so frequently with loco, locis; cf. ch. ii. 7.
puerorum mulierumque, “consisting of women and children,”
gen. of definition. Notice the significance in the difference between English and Latin order; cf. ch. xix. 7, liberos, uxores.
19. fugere coepit. With an active infinitive, the active perfect, coepi, is used; with a passive infinitive, the deponent, coeptus sum: e.g., coepi fugere, but coeptus sum fugari.
Undoubtedly Ca>sar’s treatment of the Usipetes and Tencteri is one of the least satisfactory episodes of his career. Even if entire credence be placed in Ciesav’s charge of treachery against them (and there is at least one very doubtful point in his account), he was not justified in detaining a deputation that had come with apologies, in surprising the enemy at a time when tney believed there was truce, and in sending cavalry to massacre the women and children. So strongly did his old enemy Cato (a stern, bigoted, uncompromisingNOTES, ROOK IV.
enemy, it must be admitted) feed, that when a supplicatio, or public thanksgiving, was proposed to celebrate his achievements in Gaul and Britain, he proposed as an amendment that Cjesar be handed over to the Usipetes and Tencteri. In palliation of his conduct, it may be urged that, supposing there was any treachery on the enemy’s part, it was in accordance with the spirit of the age (of which, as a rule, Ciesar seems in advance) to take ruthless vengeance, and that the fickle nature of the Gauls rendered a stern lesson necessary.
Chapter XV.
2. signis militaribus, These were figures of animals on poles, se . . . eiecerunt, “they hurried.”
3. confluentem Mosae et Rheni. This must mean the confluence
of the Mosa with the Vacalus ( Waal), which C’a'sar has in ch. x. referred to as the Rhine, (in Rhenum iujluit). But there is a difficulty, because Ciesar crossed the Rhine far higher up, and there is no record of the march southwards. Accordingly, some authorities would read Mosellae for Mosae here. But it seems very unlikely that Ciesar is referring to any other confluence than that mentioned in ch. x. Probably the march southwards to the place of crossing is omitted, as lacking incident.
FO/KSAH'S tlAl.ldt! WAR.
confluentem, used ns a substantivi', like continens, /irq/titni*, some noun like /or ax being uiulerstootl,
reliqua fuga desperata, “ despairing of further flight.”
(i. ad unum, “to a man.”
ex . . . timore, “recovering from (heir fear." I'.r often lias the, meaning of “after."
cum- —fuisset explains timore. We should put the sentence in a parenthesis (“forthe number," AiO
capitum depends on milium, which is gen. of definition.
1>. iis. the deputation.
potestatem fecit, “gave the opportunity."
His	concessit. This acquiescence on (Cesar’s part is more
iu accordance w ith his general character than the rest of his treatment of the Usipetes and Tencteri.
ClIArTKTl XVI
2. quarum	transire, “of these the most valid was that, as
he saw the Hermans were so easily persuaded to cross into (laid, lie wished they also should have some anxiety for their own position at homo by being made to understand that the army of Koine had both the power and the courage to cross the Khine."
quoque—/.e., they, as well as the people whose land they were invading.
6. Accessit . . . quod, lit., “there came also the fact that," />., “besides.*’ A similar expression is aihlilum <>/ quod ; accolo is used in this phrase as the passive of ru/i/o,
transisse = trauxiwc, tnnisiriw. proelio, dative.
qui postularent, final snbjnnct., “to ask" (see App. II.)
qui intulissent, snhjuuct. due to t/iii, restrictive, “such as” (see App. 11.)
sibi. Txomembev that the reflexive pronoun in a subordinate clause can refer to the subject of the sentence on which it depends, as well as to the subject of its own clause. Here, of course, sibi = (\osar. There seems to be no strict rule as to the use of the reflexive pronoun in a relative or rol. adverb clause when the pronoun refers to the subject of the principal verb, but generally it is employed if the verb of the subordinate clause is in the subjunctive.
dederent, jussive subjuuct. in semi-dependence on postularent (see App. II.)






















c.ksah’s e.AUJC WAR.
120. id	futurum, “that for (as regards) assistance and hope for
the future, that would sufliee.” The gen. (temporis) is objective.
-Ii. nomen atque opinionem, “reputation and prestige."
eius, “Ids,” dependent on, not agreeing with, exercitus.
Ariovisto pulso. Wo should say, “owing to the defeat of Ariovistus.” The defeat of Ariovistus is recorded in Ilk. i. eh. xxx. onwards.
l2.‘l. etiam ad, “ even in the eyes of."
-1. opinione. “ prestige,” as above.
tuti esse. Note that the predicate of the prolative infinitivo is always in the same ease as the subject of the verb on which it depends.
Chaptkr XVII.
2. sed	statuebat, “ but crossing by ships (aid. of means or in
strument), he decided, was neither quite sate nor worthy of the prestige of himself or Home." For the gen., ef. eh. xiii, f>.
f>. proponebatur, “presented itself to him"—the “middle” use of the passive ; ef. oh. .xxxii. 10.
G. id	aliter, “ that lie must aim at this, or else ...”
Rationem	iungebat. “ This was the plan of the bridge that
lie adopted. At an interval of two feet he braced together pairs of piles a foot and a half thick, sharpened a little way from the bottom, measured in accordance with the depth of the stream.” Study the illustration.
S. dimensa, deponent used passively, as not uncommonly in the participle.
Haec	statuebat. “When, by his machinery, he had low
ered these into the stream and fixed them, and had driven them in with rammers, not quite perpendicularly, like (an ordinary) pile, hut sloping and slantwise, so as to incline with the current, he then set opposite to these two other piles biaeed in the same way, at a distance of forty feet lower down stream, sloping against the force and rush of the current.”
machinationibus, explained by illustration.
 defixerat . . . adegerat. Cum, with the pluperfect indie., implies frequency (see on eh, i, 10). Here the operation was repeated on many pairs of piles, probably about sixty, as the breadth of the I,‘//ini’ at Ilonn, where he probably crossed, is about ddO feet.
modo, “after the manner of” (see note on eh. xvi. 20).
1*2. ad perpendiculum. The preposition, as in ad eundem modum below, has the force of “according to.”
































C/ES A It's (iALLIC WAH.
Inter vallo, “at an interval,” practically adverbial. It is difficult to classify this abl. It may originally have been either abl. of measure, or locative abl., or abl. abs. (“there being an interval ”).
quadragenum, distributive, because of the several pairs of piles. The imperfect, iungebat, is due to the same reason.
ab inferiore parte, either “lower down stream ” (lit., “sloping from a lower part of the stream”) or “at the lower end of the piles” (lit., “ measured from the lower end ”). If it is taken in the former sense, Ciesar does not say whether the forty feet distance lay between the upper end of the sloping piles or the lower. It would, of course, make a difference of several feet in the breadth of the roadway of the bridge. In either case notice the accurate use of the preposition ab; cf. ab extrema parte, and ab imo.
Haec utraque	tenorentur. “ Beams two feet thick having
been let in from above to the width of the fastening between these piles (i.e., each member of the pairs), the two (opposite) pairs were held apart by two braces on either side.”
utraque.	Uterqne,	in the sing., is used of individual things
or persons ; in the plural, of sets. So with quisque, alius, alter.
quantum	distabat means that the trabs on which the road
way rested just filled the space between the two piles, which, Caesar says above, were two feet apart.
binis utrimque fibulis. There is great divergence of opinion as to the meaning of this phrase. Fibula is variously interpreted as
a " brace ” joining the two piles, nailed on (Heller and Cohausen);
a “pin” running through the two piles (Kraner); (3) “crossstays” between the pairs of piles, cutting one another vertically, the centre of each arch (Emperor Napoleon III.) Most authorities incline to (1) or (2), as better suiting the meaning of fibula (“a brooch” or “brooch-pin”); but (3) is more suitable to distinebantur, “were kept apart,” and the bridge needed some such support. It is difficult to see how this verb applies either to (1) or (2); for it would be the trabs, not the fibulae, that would hold the pairs of piles apart. There is some small MS. authority for destinabantur (“ were fixed”), which would make good sense with (1) and (2). On the whole, as there is no authority for fibulae—cross-stays (3), it is best to take them in their natural meaning, (1) or (2), and to explain distinebantur to mean that the fibulae, by securing the trabs (which really held the pairs of tigna apart) at each end between the tigna, are said themselves to keep them apart. (1) and (3) arc represented in the first illustration, (1) and (2) in the second.dverbial. It is lave been either ‘ there l)eing an
several pairs of o reason.
. ” (lit., “sloping wer eml of the is taken in the ,y feet distance or the lower, il feet in the ease notice the tna parte, and
t thick having between these itc) pairs were
lividual things ns, alter. hieli the road- which, Caesar
cc of opinion uterpreted as id Coliausen);
I; (3) “ cross- ertically, the t authorities >f fibula ("a » distineban- ich support, tr (2); for it lairs of piles ntur (“ were
. On the
, it is best to explain
rabs (which i the tigna, representedC.KSAU’S tSALLIC WAR.
binis utrimque. If wc take Jihitlae .as “braces” (1), utrimquo may mean, (a) on either side (inside and outside) of the pairs of piles, in which case there would he four each side of the bridge, eight in all at. each arch; or (b) on either side of the bridge, in which ease there would be only four at each arch ; or (e) on either side of the arch, in which ease there would only be two at each arch.
quibus disclusis	tenerentur, “and these piles being held
apart and clamped in opposite directions, so great was the strength and nature of the structure, that the more strongly the volume of water dashed against it, the more tightly they were bound together.”
quibus, connectivo rel. referring to haec utraque—i.e., the pairs of thjna.
incitavisset. The subjunct. is duo to attraction to tenerentur, hence it = incita verat; and for this pluperfect of indefinite frequency, see note on defixerat above.
Haec	consternebantur. "This framework was connected
by timber placed lengthwise, and was strewn with poles and hurdles.” Haec is neuter plur., used loosely of the framework generally.
derecta materia—/.e., resting on the trains at right angles, whilst the lomjurii were placed across, on the top of the materia.
ac nihilo	nocerent, “and nevertheless (i.e., although
the bridge was strong already) piles were driven in slantwise at the lower part of the river also, in order that, being set as a buttress and united with the whole structure, they might bear the force of the stream ; and others also were set a little way above the bridge, that, if trunks of trees or ships were sent down by the natives to destroy the work, the shock of them might be lessened by these ‘ protectors,’ and that they might not damage the bridge.”
sublicae. In this passage distinguish carefully the two kinds of piles : (1) those driven in slantwise on the lower side of the bridge, acting as buttresses (e), and (2) those driven in above, and separate from the structure, as protectors against ships or timber floating down on to the bridge (f).
quae, final=ut eae.
pro ariete. A “ ram ” is generally an engine of offence ; here, a means of defence.
mediocri spatio. See on eh. x. 5.
deiciendi operis, gen. descriptive of naves, “ ships for the purpose of.”NOTES, HOOK IV.
CHAPTER XVIII.
1. Diebus x quibus, abl. of “time within which.” coepta erat comportari. See on eh. xiv. 13.
5. quibus, connective.
7. fuga	iis. The second aid. abs. depends on the first: “taking
to flight at the exhortation of those.”
10. in solitudinem. Latin accuracy uses in and ace. because of the idea of motion in se abdiderat (see on eh. xii. 11).
comperissent, suboblique suhjunct.
uti depends on idea of ‘ ‘ ordering ” in nuntios dimisisse.
liberos, uxores. See on oh. xiv. 12.
possent would have been suhjunct. (7«!= “such as"), even had it not been suboblique.
hunc, “ this spot had been chosen almost in the centre of.”
obtinerent, snboblique suhjunct.
hie . . . ibi. Both imply the same place.
rebus . . . rerum. For the repetition, cf. eh. vii. 2.
ut . . . ut . . . ut, the three purposes he had achieved (rebus confectis). The ut is repeated for giving greater clearness in enumeration.
obsidione, “ from pressure.”
satis	profectum, “ that enough had been accomplished
as regards both honour and expediency.”
profectum, from projicio.
Chapter XX.
1. Exigua	reliqua, “as a small part of the summer remained.”
4. Gallicis bellis. Help was sent from Britain to the Veneti the year before.
magno . . . usui, dat. of purpose. It is seldom used with any adjective except magnus.
si modo adisset. We should say, “ only to have approached.”
Neque temere, “not lightly.”
iilo, adv., “thither.”
Gallias, plur., because divided into three parts.priusquam periculum faceret, “before making tho attempt.” For the subjnnct., see on eh. iv. 17.
navi longa, “man-of-war.”
5. brevissimus . . . traiectus. All Ca>sar seems to mean is that from the territory of the Morini (modern Departments of Pas ile Calais and Xonl) the crossing is shortest. We need not press inde to mean the harbour in that district, which is, in strict accuracy, by a mile or two the nearest. This territory includes the harbours of Bouhxjnn (which the Romans also called Gesoriaeum), Ambhteusr, Wissant, and Calais. It is probable that Ciesar embarked at the same harbour as in his second expedition (Bk. v. ch. ii.)—i.e., Portus Itius ; and whether this was Buutoyue or cannot be definitely decided, but it was probably the former, in spite























barbari . . . imperiti aro. tlio emphatic words. The want of a present participle of mini is often felt.
nostrae - /lommnn, though here used liy (finds, not Romans, populo Romano, dative.
f>. quae imperasset, suhol*li(jne subjunot. — i/n<te hn/nr<treria of tho direct speech (see on eh. vi. •"»).
0. has , . , occupationes. See on eh. xvi. ii»,
Britanniae, a condensed expression (compendious comparison or braohylogy) for “the expedition into Britain.'’
10. Quibus adductis eos. This is not a variation from the general rule in Latin, that tho aid. ahs. is only used when the phrase cannot he worked into the construction of the sentence; for quibus and os do not refer to tho same people ; quibus refers to the hostages, eos to the whole tribe.
in fidem recepit, “took them under his protection.”
Navibus . . . onerariis, “transports," “troopships."
ad duas . . . legiones. If we reckon Caesar's legions at ,".li0() m <n each, this would give !)() men to each transport. In eh. xxxvii. we find 300 men disembarking from two ships. The two legions were vii.aud x.
quod	navium longarum, “all the ships of war that ho
had ” ; lit., “ what of ships," &e., partitive gen.
quaestori. See on eh. xiii. 0.
legatis praefectisque. Sec Introduction, p. xxiii.
Hue —ml has.
accedebant, “ there were in addition ” ; ef. eh. xvi. G. Besides the eighty transports which Ciesar collected at Jlon/o'jne (if Bonloijne was the place of his embarkation), there were eighteen which were weather-bound at a port a little way higher up the coast, called in eh. xxiii. portus ulterior, and .in eh. xxviii, sujierior. This may be identified with Ambletense. If II’wmim/ be taken as the place of embarkation, the portus ulterior would be Calais. It was on these eighteen transports that his cavalry embarked, but, owing to stress of weather, they never landed in Britain.
a milibus passuum viii, "at a distance of eight miles.’’ A, ab are not generally used in this sense if the place from which the distance is reckoned be mentioned, as here (ex eo loco).
vento tenebantur quo minus, “ were weather-bound (amt pro* vented) from,”
20. ducendum dedit. Cf. the construction of the gerundive with ctiro—e.fj., curavit filium docendum, “he had his son taught”; cf. ch, xxix. 3.
22. portum tenere, here=“to occupy the port.” Another meaning of the phrase is “ to make for port.”«. The want of , not Homans.
»j» raririn of the
otis comparison
rom tlm general > phrase cannot quibuB ami eos ic hostages, eos
on."’
hips.”
ns at .‘KiOO in n xxxvii. wo liml wore vii.aml x. war that ho
xvi. 0. Be- /loiilo'jnr (if •uro eighteen up the coast, urrior. This as the placo was on these ng to stress
les.” A, ab icli the disci (and pre-
mlivc with light”; cf.
ther mean-c^sar’s gallic war.
Chapter XXIII.
tempestatem, as often simply “weather.”
tertia fere vigilia, between midnight and 2.30 a.m. The time between sunset and sunrise was divided into four equal periods —viijiliae—which, of course, like the /tora, varied in length according to the time of year. It was now the end of August, and it has been calculated from the fact that three days after the arrival in Britain (August 31, 3 a.m.) there was a full moon (ch. xxix. 1), that Ca-sar reached the British coast on August 27. Accordingly he left France about midnight of August 20.
solvit, sc. ancoram, “he weighed anchor.” ulteriorem portum. See note on ch. xxii. 14.
4. hora diei circiter quarta. The Roman day was divided into twelve equal periods {horae) between sunrise and sunset. On August 27 sunrise would have been about 5.0 a.m., and sunset about 0.54 p.m. A kora on that day would be about 1 hour 18 minutes. Thus the fourth hour would be from about 8.33-9,42 A.M.
6. collibus, the cliffs of Dover.
dum . . . convenirent. See on ch. iv. 17. eo, usual Latin accuracy for English “there.”
ad horam nonam. The ninth hour would have been 2.18-3.2 P.M.
13. monuitque	administrarentur. Trans., “ gave injunc
tions that all things should be executed at the slightest sign and at the right moment, as the science of war required, and especially service on board ship, inasmuch as it entailed swift and unsteady motion.” This sentence must be carefully studied. Ut, in the first two places = “as,” and the subjunct. postularent is suboblique. The third ut goes closely with quae, lit. “as being things which”—i.e., seeing that they (or “ it,” as res maritimae = “naval service”). Ut qui, like quippe qui, is used with the subjunct. (haberent), qui being generic or restrictive. Administrarentur is jussive subjunct. in semi-dependence, without an ut, on monuit.
ad nutum, lit., “at a nod.”
tempus, like Greek /faipo's = “the right moment.”
ventum . . . secundum, a west wind, which brought him round the South Foreland.
19. aperto ac piano litore, the open beach between Wahner and Deal. The phrase is abl. abs.

























Caesar’s gallic war.
meum, emphatic position.
15. cohortati inter se, “with mutual encouragement.
16. universi, “in a body.”
Hos	navibus, placed before cum for emphasis.
Chapter XXVI.
firmiter insistere, “to gain a foothold.”
signa subsequi. The signa here would be those of the maniples. See Introduction, p. xxvi.
alius alia ex navi, “ out of the several ships,” “one out of one ship, another out of another.”
quibuscumquo signis, dat. governed by occurrerat.
occurrerat, iterative plupcrf. Sec on eh. i. 10. So conspexerant, below.
singulares, “ individuals,” opposed to universos, below.
ab latere aperto, “on their exposed side”—i.e., the right. The shields were held on the left arm. Notice the accuracy of the Latin prep.
scaphas (<TKd<prj from ffudirTfiv, “to hollow out”), small rowing- boats, carried by larger vessels.
speculatoria navigia, swift boats for reconnaissance. A Roman writer says they were painted sea-green (colore vegeto) to escape detection.NOTES, HOOK IV.
conspexerat. For tense see above. So submittebat, “he kept sending.'’
simul = simul atque.
in arido. Cf. ex arido, in alto (ch. xxiv. 5).
neque,“but not.”
equites, who had embarked in the eighteen weather-bound transports at Amhletcnse (see ch. xxii. 14). For their fate, see ch. xxviii.
capere, “ to make the island” ; cf. ch. xxxvi. S, portu* capere.
Hoc unum . . . defuit. Caesar shared, with many other great men, “ the absurd presumption in their own good fortune.” Like Sulla, who styled liiinself Felix and his son Faustus, he believed in his “star”; cf. Bk. i. ch. xl. ; ih., ch. liii. He seems to have believed in fortune as a supreme power coequal with the gods, if not above them, in the guidance of events.
ad, “in regard to.”
Chapter XXVII.
miserunt . . . polliciti sunt, asyndeton.
imperasset. See on ch. vi. 5, and ch. xxii. 5.
quern . . . demonstraveram . . . praemissum. Notice the difference between Latin and English idiom: “who, I pointed out, had been sent.”
G. oratoris modo, “in the character of an envoy” (see on ch. xvi. 20).
7. in vincula. Commius’ subsequent disloyalty (see note on ch. xxi. and Index of Names) makes it not improbable that this imprisonment was at his own desire. In that case he intended to await the result of the British resistance to Ciesar. On the submission o£ the Britons he was sent back to Caesar (Bk. v. ch. xxii.)
in multitudinem. There seems to have been a certain amount of popular control amongst the Britons.
ignosceretur may be either impersonal, or personal with hoc supplied as subject, for aliquid alicui iijnosco (“I pardon a thing to a person ”) is used. The acc. of the thing pardoned is used mostly with pronouns and simple adjectives like omnia, multa, and, with very rare exceptions, only when the dat. of the person is expressed. The dat. of the thing pardoned is the usual construction with nouns (cf. imprudentiae, below); but in this case the dat. of the person is not used as well—
Ignoscit { m/ae \ stultitiae; not i m}^ 1 stultitiae.
1. eius J	(	et J
Qpost diem quartum quam, “three days after,” Aug. 27 (see note on eh. xxiii. 2). We should expect post (adverb) die quarto quant, “on the fourth day after that,” but by attraction to post (as a preposition) the ace. is written. This is natural, for “ after four days ” = both quarto post die and post quart mu diem. For a similar attraction, cf. the idiom in the Calendar, ante tertium diem Nonas, Feb. = tertio die ante Nonas Feb. Here ante, and in the text post, are made to do double duty.
supra. Ch. xxiii.
ex superiore portu. See note on ch. xxii. 14.
viderentur. The transports were sighted somewhere off the North Foreland by Ca?sar in bis camp near Deal.
inferiorem partem, the south coast to the west of Deal, near Sandgatc.
propius. Sec note on ch. ix. 2.
cum, “attended with,” or “to their great peril.” suo. Sui which many read here would be objective gen., “with great danger to themselves.”
tamen goes closely with ancoris iactis : “since these, in spite of anchors being east, were being swamped with the waves.”
adversa nocte, abl. abs. concessive, “although the night was stormy.”
Eadem nocte. The night is that of Aug. 30. The moon was full at 3 a.m. of Aug. 31, which, according to Roman reckoning (the day began at sunrise), would still have been 30th.
ut, substantival (see on ch. v. 4).
qui dies, English idiom, “a day which.”
aestus maximos, the spring tides, rising twenty or thirty feet These high tides would naturally be remarkable to Casar, who was accustomed to the Mediterranean, which, being an inland sea, has practically no tide.
nostrisque id . . . incognitum. Yet the Romans had had opportunity of studying the tides the year before, on the west coast






















CyESAU’s GALLIC WAR.
3. ad omnes casus, “for all emergencies.
quae . . . naves. In Latin, when the relative clause coines first, the antecedent frequently is placed in it.
aere, “ bronze,” used largely instead of iron,
summo studio, “ with a will. '
administraretur, impersonal.
amissis, concessive.
reliquis	effecit, lit., “ lie brought it about that bv means
of the rest it should be suitably sailed”—i.e., “made the rest seaworthy.” reliquis (emphatic position) is abl. of means or instrument.
Chapter XXXII.
frumentatum, supine in -inn after verb of motion, as always to express purpose.
neque . . . interposita, “ no suspicion of war up to that time having arisen.”
pars . . . pars, asyndeton, making a stronger contrast.
statione. See on eh. iv. 11. It generally consisted of a cohort (one-half relieving the other) at each of the four gates of the camp.
ferret, “than wras usual”: the subjunct. is suboblique. In direct speech it would be indie.—e.g., Bk. vi. eh. vii., maiore strepitu . . . quam . . . populi Romani fert consuetudo.
in ea parte . . . quam in partem. See on ch. vii. 1.
fecisset, suboblique.
novi, partitive gen. of neuter adjective used as noun ; ef. in alto, in aridum. Remember, aliquid uori, but aliquod novum.
in stationem . . . succedere, “ to go on duty.”
armari, middle use of pass., “to arm themselves;” cf. ch. xvii. 5.
12. conferta	coici. We might say, “ that the legion was
crowded together and was being subjected to a cross-fire.”
16. delituerant, delitesco.
tum dispersos	perturbaverant. The language in this sen
tence is extremely condensed. Our English idiom would run somewhat as follows: “Our men were scattered, and, having dropped their arms, were busy in cutting the corn, when the enemy had suddenly attacked them. A few had been killed ; the rest, with wavering ranks, had fallen into confusion, and had at the same time been surrounded by cavalry anti chariots.” This is far from being a literal translation.C. NS All’s GALLIC WAIL
IS. equitatu atque essedis, aid. of means or instrument.
I!). circumdederant. The word has two constructions: (a) cir- cumdare (to surround) op/iii/um muro (aid.), as hero ; and (b) circum- dare (to throw round) oppido (dat.) /nurum.
Chaptkk XXXIII.
1. ex essedis pugnae. Sec on oh. xvi. 15.
3. cum insinuaverunt, iterativo (see on oh. i. 10).
pedibus. See on oh. ii. 7. proeliantur. Tacitus, in hi*, hook on Britain (Agricola, xii.;, romarks, that of the two men in each chariot the man of noble birth drove, and the dependant fought. This arrangement is the reverso of the old Greek stylo in Homeric days.
S. mobilitatem . . . stabilitatem, Essedum.	asyndeton, to increaso tho force of
the contrast.
incitatoB . . . sustinere, “check their horses at full speed.”
brevi = breri tempore. per, “along.”
consuerint=consueverint. The perfect is used with a present meaning.
ClIAPTKH XXXIV.
3. constiterunt . . . receperunt, asyndeton.
se receperunt, “recovered.” Remember tho two meanings oi this phrase, “ retreat ” and “ recover.”
alienum, “unfavourable.”
continuos complures dies, “for several days continuously.”
quae, consecutive.
a pugna. Elsewhere in this book we have the simple abl.
13. sui liberandi. See on ch. xiii. 14.
si . . . expulissent, “if they drove.” The Latin tense, as usual, is more accurate.






















104	C/ESAlt's GALLIC WAR.
in potestatem . . . venerunt, “ submitted to.”
Q. Titurius et L. Cotta. See ch. xxii. 18.
supplicatio. Tho supplicatio was a public service of intercession or thanksgiving at times of great national peril or joy. As a rule it only lasted three or four days, but at the cud of his second campaign Ccssar had a fifteen days’ supplicatio decreed, and now even this was exceeded. Obviously the crossing of the Rhine and the invasion of Britain struck the Roman imagination, for a twenty days’ supplicatio seems out of all proportion to his real achievements this year. See noto at the end of ch. xiv.
BOOK V.
Chapter I.
L. Domitio, Ap. Claudio. 5-1 b.c. discedens, “when in the act of departing.”
in Italiam—«.<?., Italy north of the Rubicon, or Gallia Citerior. He could not enter Italy proper \ 'thout losing his imperium He went to this part of his jurisdiction every >car to hold tho assizes (see note on conventus, below), and also to keep in touch with home politics.
quotannis. See on Bk. iv. ch. i. 9.
legatis, eight in number, in command of one legion each.
aedificandas . . . curent. See on Bk. iv. ch. xxii. 20. Notice the mixture of strict and vivid sequence.
modum, “build.”
subductiones, governed by ad. Ancient ships were beached, and not left at anchor. The disaster to his fleet on the British coast had taught Caesar tho necessity of making this process easier.
humiliores, “lower” in the bulwarks and “shallower” in the hold. The word, of course, agrees with naves, understood.
nostro rrari, the Mediterranean, id. Sc. facit.
minus magnos . . . fluctus refers to the short choppy waves of the English Channel. These are here attributed tc the “changing currents.” Caesar’s statement here as to the comparative size ot the

cussion and passing of laws. They arc to ho distinguished from tho concilium totius (/allinc, or council of all Gaul, a purely native institution, where every city of Gaul was represented. Some authorities think that the word is hero used in its common sense of “council of war,” which was attended hy tho commander, stall', and chief centurions, and held before the praetorium or headquarters of tho Roman camp.
Chapter III.
supra. Bk. iv. eh. x.
Indutiomarus et Cingetorix. Indutiomarus was .father-in-law of Cingetorix.
alter, Cingetorix.
G. in officio, “ in allegiance.”
7. quaeque	gererentur, indirect question, or, according to
others, a relative clause in which the suhjunct. is suboblique, duo to ostendit, tho clause being part of Cingetorix’s assertion.
15. privatim, owing to its position, becomes practically an adjective. Livy, vi. 39, 6, is generally quoted as a parallel, maximo privatim periculo, nulli publice emolumento.
1G. civitati, opposed to privatim. possent, suboblique.
mittit—i.e., Indutiomarus.
Sese	laberetur, a plausible excuse, which Caesar saw
through.
20. discessu, causal ablative.
laberetur, “should fall away,” i.e., “revolt.”
23. fidei, “protection.”
Chapter IV.
principibus . convocatis . . . hos. See on Bk. iv. ch. xii. 4 ; xxii. 10.
cum . . . turn, “ both . . . and.”
magni, locative used of price, “ it was of great importance.” interesse, impersonal infinit. of interest; to be distinguished
from the personal use of interesse, “to be present at”; cf. Bk. iv. ch. xvi. 8.
suos, of course, refers to eius—i.e., Cingetorix.
cuius . . . perspexisset, snbjunct. due to cuius causal,
“since his.”






















diceret is a common and natural, but not strictly logical, expression for ut dicebat, impediretur. The alleged cause is really contained not in diceret but in impediri. What is meant by religionibus is not stated—probably omens and sacrifices.
hortari coepit. This is not a violation of the rule given in note on Bk. iv. ch. xiv. 13, as hortari is active in meaning.
metu territare, historic infin., with Dumnorix as subject, The terseness of the language expresses passion.
fieri breaks off into or. obi., dependent on the idea of “ saying in territare; cf. ch. xxxi. 3. ut, substantival.
traductos necaret, “ to take across and kill.” interponere, a return to the historic infin. Trans., “ he gave
assurances to the rest.”
exusu, “to be in accordance with the interest of” ; sc. esse.
Caesar has been criticised for his harsh treatment of a patriot chief, but if we can believe Ca?sar’s record of the facts, Dumnorix, by constant intrigues, rendered his execution a necessity. It would have been very unwise to permit the loyalty of the Haedui to be tampered with.
quid, cognate acc. sibi, Caesar.
6. commoratus=commorans (see on Bk. iv. ch. xiii. 12).
Corus, Caurus or Chorus, N.W. wind.
8. dabat operam, “took care.”
11. impeditis, “ being occupied.”
retrahi. See on ch. i. 11.
pro sano, masc., “ like a sane man.”
arbitratus. See on Bk. iv. ch. xiii. 12. qui, causal.
suorum fidem, “ the protection of his friends.”
liberum se liberaeque civitatis. The Haedui were, it is true, “allies of Rome,” but scarcely “free” from the Roman point of view. Anyhow, it was impossible for Caesar to tolerate Dumnorix’ intrigues. If we condemn his execution, we must condemn the whole conquest of Gaul.
ut erat imperatum. Caesar frankly takes the responsibility for the act.






















Cesar’s gallic war.
molli, “sandy,” or “shingly.” The adjectives are predicative, expressed in ftnglish idiom by “a” instead of “the,” “on a sandy and open shore.”
equitatu atque essedis. Ree on Bk. iv. ch. xxiv. 3.
ad flumen, either the Great Stour or the Little Stour. Landing at Deal, Caesar would naturally reach the Little Stour first; but this river is now a mere ditch. If it was so then, Ciesar may have omitted to mention crossing it. If Ciesar landed at Romney Marsh, it would be the Great Stour.
ex loco superiore. The Britons were on the north bank, which was higher.
rari, “ in small parties.”
testudine facta. There were two kinds of testudo: (1) arietaria, a wooden movable shed or pent-house, covered with hide, to
protect soldiers who were working the artillery, the battering-ram, or mining operations; (2) a formation of soldiers, with shields locked above their heads forming a complete covering, under shelter of Testudo arietaria.	which the fortification could be
approached and demolished, or, as here, earth be brought up, and an agger, or counter-earthwork, formed. See Frontispiece.
18. fugientes, object of prosequi.
20. munitioni castrorum tempus. An ordinary camp for a brief encampment would be fortified in about three hours.
Chapter X.
1. Postridio eius diei mane, simply “the next morning”; eius diei is superfluous.
tripertito does not refer to formation, but implies that they went by three different roads.
extremi, the rear of the enemy.
sustinerent . . . possent, suboblique.
9. magnum esse incommodum, emphatic order.
Chapter XI.
3. sic ut, “to this extent that,” a limitative use of the phrase; so ita . . . lit, often with the meaning of “while . . . yet.”NOTES, BOOK V .
tamen answers amissis . . . navibus, which is a concessive abl. ahs.
r>. fabros deligit. Accompanying every legion there was a corps o{ftibri under the command of a praefectus fabrum ; but Ca'sar does not seem here to he referring to these professional engineers, but to soldiers picked from the ordinary ranks with a skill for engineering. Every Roman soldier was something of an engineer. He was constantly engaged in making camps, forts, bridges, &c.
iis legionibus, abl. of means or instrument.
quae sint. Some editions have sunt, but the subjunctive (sub- oblique) is required.
multae operae ac laboris, gen. of quality or description.
easdem . . . quas ante, “ the same as be.ore.”
eodem—i.r., to the Stour.
i umma, a noun.
'7 Cassivellauno. Latinised form of Caswallon. The name is id to mean “king of the league.” cuius fines, Middlesex.
J8. flumen quod . . . Tamesis. The relative here is not attracted to agreement with the predicate as in Bk. iv. ch. i. 1.
a mari, from Deed, where he landed, to the place where he crossed the Thames, near Sunbury.
20. continentia, “uninterrupted.”
Chapter XII.
1. quos	dicunt. We might say, “-whom oral tradition repre
sents as indigenous in the island.
natos depends upon proditum (cssn being understood In each case). As a matter of fact, the Celtic Britons w'cic not the first inhabitants, but were preceded by a black-haired race of Basques or Iberians (see Introduction, p. xiii).
3. qui	pervenerunt, “who are nearly alb called by the same
names as the states from which they sprang before their migration to Britain.” Take as instances the Atrebates (sec on Bk. iv. ch. xxi. 10), Belga>, and Parisii, names occurring both in Gaul and Britain. Notice, as often, the principal idea is expressed by the participle orti—lit., “from which having sprung they arrived thither.” The whole sentence is condensed for isdem nominibus quibus riri/ates [appellantur] ex quibus orti, <tc.
Gallicis consimilia—naturally, as both races were Celtic. These buildings are said by Strabo to have been “large, built of planksand wattled reeds, circular in shape, with a high roof.” In ch. xliii. they are said to he thatched (stramentis tectae).
aut aere, bracketed in Meusel’s text.
nummo aureo. Cicero, in his Letters (Ad Fam. vii. 7, § 1; Ad Att. iv. 16, § 7), says that there was not a scrap of gold to be found in the island. Strabo, however, and Tacitus include gold and silver among the resources of the country. Mommsen states that discoveries prove the existence of a gold coinage in Britain at a date prior to Cresar’s invasion. Silver and copper coinage came in considerably later.
taleis ferreis, “iron bars,” a common form of primitive coinage, examinatis, “fixed by standard.”
plumbum album, “tin.” In very early times the Plmuiieians are said to have fetched tin from Britain ; but see Introduction, p. xi. Plumbum nigrum is “lead.”
mediterraneis, “inland.” This must refer to Cornwall; but, as a matter of fact, the tin mines were on the coast.
maritimis, Simer. The railings round St Paul’s Cathedral were made of Simer iron.
aere, “bronze.”
Materia, “timber.”
fagum. A curious statement. Either the fagus, as some believe, was our chestnut, or else Caesar's statement is based on the accident of his not seeing any beeches in Kent and Middlesex.
abietem must refer to the silver fir, which has been introduced into England in modern times, not to the Scotch pine.
Leporem . . . putant. Primitive religious faiths constantly forbade the use of certain animals as food, a survival of animal worship. The hare was forbidden as an article of food by the Mosaic law.
animi voluptatisque causa, “ for fancy and pleasure.”
Loca, “climate.”
remissioribus frigoribus, “the seasons of cold being less severe.” Tacitus says of Britain, asperitas frigorum abest (Ayr. xii.)






















Lord Say. You men of Kent,—
Dick. What say you of Kent.'!
Say. Nothing but this ; ’tis bona terra, mala gens.
Cade. Away with him, away with him ! he speaks Latin.
Say. Hear roe but speak, and bear me where yon will.
Kent, in the Commentaries C.'esar writ,
Is term’d the eivil’st place of all this isle.
2. maritima . . . Interiores. It is natural that higher civilisation should be found on the coast than in the interior.
hoc, abl. of measure, “all the” (see on Bk. iv. eh. xxx. 5). It might be taken in agreement with aspectu.
capillo . . . promisso, abl. of description.
Uxores habent deni duodenique inter se communes, “ten or (notice difference of idiom) twelve men have wives in common ”—
e., 10 or 12 men had 10 or 12 wives in common. The distributive numeral vefers to the differen. groups or societies of ten or a dozen men that had community of wives.
eoium habentur. The object of the system seems to have been to ensure children for every one.
quo, adverb=arf quo*.
deducta, the technical word for bringing a bride to her husband’s home.
ita . . . ut. See on ch. xi. 3.
fuerint . . . compulerint. The perfect subjunct., like the perf. indie., is used as an aorist: (1) as here, in consecutive clauses, laying stress on the actual result rather than on the cause ; (2) in prohibitions, ne hoc feceris; (3) in indirect questions with future pa’ ieiple, rogavi quid facturi fuerint, “ I asked what they would have done.”
amiserunt. The Roman cavalry is the subject, spatio, of time, though, just below, of place.
atque his, “and these, too.”
primis. The first cohorts contained the best men. All the men had to reach five feet ten inches in height.
cum	constitissent, “these having halted a very short
distance apart.” Inter sc goes with intermisso.
per medios, between the two cohorts.
tribunus militum. Sec Introduction, p. xxiii.






















C/ESAll’s GALLIC WAIL
can be expressed either by quod with the indicative or by nt substantival with the subjunctive.
stationesque dispositas, “scattered outposts” of chariots with drivers.
alios . . . alii, “on o jxirty . . . another parly” exciperent, “covered.”
integrique, “and so fresh.”
succederent, “relieved.”
C1IAFTEK XVII.
4. tres legiones, an extraordinary number for the purpose.
pabulatores, not the whole legions, but parties sent out from them.
sic uti	absisterent, “with such impetuosity as not to
shrink from attacking the standards and legions”—i.r., after routing the pabulatores. Others take sic uti as limitative—i.<\, “ they routed the foragers, and yet at the same time did not leave oil' attacking the legions.” Others would read sicubi and omit non, “whenever they (the pabulatores) quitted their standards and legions.”
10. sui colligendi. See on Bk. iv. ch. xiii. 14.
auxilia, contingents sent to Cassivellaunus from other tribes.
summis . . . copiis, emphatic order, “ in full force.”
Chapter XVIII.
uno omnino loco, “only at one place at all.” Where this ford was is the subject of dispute. Some have put it as far down the river as Westminster, others as far up as Wallingford. All we gather from Ciesar is that it was eighty miles from his landing-place. This distance, by various computations, can be made to suit different places : Wallingford, Coway, Sunbnry, Petersham, Kingston, are all set down as the spot. Probably, however, it was above Teddington, where the river ceases to be tidal. The only ford now is at Sunbnry, but the bed of the river may have changed. At Coway Stakes, above Walton Lock, below Sunbnry, up to the end of last ccntu-y there were some stakes, of which one is preserved in the British Museum (see next page). The Venerable Bede, in his history,1
1 “Thence he proceeded to the river Thames, where an immense multitude of the enemy had posted themselves on the farther side of the river, under the command of Cassobellaun, and fenced the bank of the river and almost all the ford under water with sharp stakes, the remains of which are to be seen to this day, each apparently about the thickness of a man’s thigh, and being eased with lead, were fixed immovably in the bottom of the river. ”—Bk. i. ch. ii.






















Cenimagni	Cassi. The exact position of these small tribes
belonging to this part of Britain is uncertain. .See, however, Index of Names.
oppidum Cassivellauni probably occupied the Bite of Verulamium (St Alban*).
Oppidum. The circular entrenchments found in many parts of England are probably old British “towns” from which the forest has disappeared, leaving only the vallum and fossa, though they are generally called Roman camps.
Cingetorix, not the man of that name mentioned in ch. v.
castra navalia, protecting the fleet which had been drawn up on the beach, mentioned in ch. xi.
neque multum, et von-multuni.
extrahi, “wasted.” Ciesar had also political reasons for wishing to be closer home, as he had just heard of the death of his daughter Julia, who had married Pompey, and was a strong tie between them.
vectigalis, partitive gen. The tribute was never paid, as no troops were left behind to enforce it.
penderet, “was to pay,” dubitative or deliberative subjunctive, as well as that of indirect question.
commeatibus, “crossings” or “relays.”
Ac sic	reicerentur, “and so it happened, that out of so
large a number of ships in the course of so many voyages, neither in this nor in the previous year was any transport ship at all missing; whilst of such as were sent back empty to him, namely, those belonging to the first relay after the soldiers had been landed and those which Labienus afterwards had had made, a very few made the harbour, and nearly all the rest were beaten back.”
uti, with desideraretur, caperent, reicerentur.
7. portaret, like remitterentur below, due to relative (generic), “such as.”NOTES, BOOK V.
remitterentur properly only applies to the ships of the first relay, and not to those which Labienus had had built in Britain, which were not “sent hack."
prioris commeatus, gen. of possession. Written in full, this sentence M ould run : eae quae prioris commeatus erant et cue quas, &c. It divides ex iis quae into two parts.
postea, eh. xi., after Cmsar had landed in Britain. Cmsar wishes to emphasise in this somewhat involved period that he had his usual wonderful good fortune, because, though he had lost ships when beached, and also when returning to Britain empty after landing the first batch of soldiers in Gaul, yet he never lost a single transport with soldiers on board.
aequinoctium, September 24. Yet Caesar was still in Britain on 2fith, for Cicero (Ad Alt., iv. 15, 10) says in a letter that lie has just received letters from his brother Quintus, and Ca>sar dated from the shores of Britain. The equinox must merely mean the season of the equinoctial gales.
necessario . . . conlocavit, “he Mas obliged to pack his men more closely.”
secunda——vigilia, “having weighed anchor at the beginning of the second M-atch ” (about 9 r.M.)j not “the second watch having begun when he had Meighed anchor,” which would require cum solverat.
Chapter XXIV.
concilioque Gallorum. See on ch. ii. 14.
frumentum . . . angustius provenerat, “ the harvest had been somewhat scanty.”

5. distribuere. For the positions of these winter camps, study the map carefully.

























NOTKS, HOOK V.
8. Bellovacis Tliia is a correction for Ihlqis of tlio MSS. It Booms necessary, as three of the tribes previously mentioned wore stationed amongst the Belgie, a general name for the tribes on the N.K. of Gaul. C'losar would not, therefore, make special mention of them here.
proxime, “recently.” This legion was the fourteenth, enrolled in r>7 n.o.
10. mederi with dot., but unarr. with ace.
milibus pass, mm cent :n continebantur. This probably means within a rent 1is » i 100 nu'es. If the statement means that no camp was more than ;0O miles :rom another, it is inaccurate.
quoad . . . cogv Tiaset, “until be learnt”; lit., “should have learnt” (see on Ilk. iv. eh. vi. f>). (u eh. xvii. S, quoad . . . rii<‘rtiHt = “ until they drove” ; the English idiom uses the same, tense to express “until they should have . . and “until they actually did ...”
Chapter XXV.
Huic, iudir. obj. to restituerat, with locum as direct obj.
in se benevolentia. See on eh. v. 8.
singulari	usus, “had found his services of particular assist
ance to him.”
Tertium	regnantem, "who was in the third year of his
reign”—lit., “who was reigning already during this the third year.”
inimici, “personal enemies.”
0. multis . . . auctoribus, abl. abs., “at the instigation of many.”
8. impulsu, "influence.”
10. quorum	mittere, “and to arrest aud send to him the men
by whose agency he had learnt Tasgetius was killed.
Chapter XXVI.
Diebus . . . quindecim, “during the fifteen days,” but not duration of time.
4. praesto fuissent, “had presented themselves before.” Praesto is an adverb.
f>. Indutiomari. For the cause of his hostility, see eh, iv.
9. desperata re, “in despair.”
aliqui. Aliquis is tiie usual form when no substantive is used.ex nostris	vellent. It is remarkable that these words, by
a strange coincidence, form two completo hexameters. As a rule, metrical prose is carefully avoided.
habere	sperarent. We should say, “they represented
that they had communications to make as regards their mutual interests, from which they anticipated the possibility of an abatement of hostilities.”
vellent . . . sperarent, suboblique.
posse has no future infinitive; hence the- present after eperarent.
Chapter XXVII.
ex Hispania, adjectival; cf. in se beneficiis, and in se iuris below (sec on Bk. iv. ch. xvi. 13).
missu, “at the sending” ; cf. coactu, iussu, iniussu, vocatu.
debere depends on confiteri.
stipendio, abl. of separation.
quod Atuatucis. This quod is relative.
numero, abl. = in numero. So obsidum loco.
fecerit. Throughout this speech the vivid sequence is often used.
suaque	multitudinem, “that his own sovereignty was of
such a limited kind that the people had no less power over him than he over the people.”
quod	potuerit, explanatory of causam.
Id se	quod, “this he could easily prove from his own
weakness, as ...” #
imperitus rerum, “inexperienced” (see on Ilk. iv. ch. i. 5).
suis copiis, abl. of means or instrument. Suis is emphatic.
oppugnandis, dat. of purpose.
alteri. It is as well to state that most texts read here alterae, an old second declension form. Ciesar also uses toto, nullo, as datives. These instances are not sufficient authority for the constant use of these forms in modern Latin prose.
Quibus	satisfecerit, “since he had satisfied the claims
of patriotism”—lit., “since he had s	them	on	the	score of
patriotism.”
habere . . . rationem, “took account of.”
officii, “ his obligation.”
monere, orare. Two verbs of the same meaning are often used in Latin to emphasise an idea, “he earnestly begged”; cf. fundere






















G. fuisse capturos, “would have adopted.”
nostri, “ for us,” objective gen. Remember that the forms nos. Intm, vent rum are used as partitive genitives, otherwise vostri, vestri.
venturos, “would not now he coming.” Notice that, in secondary sequence, si ille adesset . . . venturos (sc. esse) is capable of representing three different conditional clauses cf the direct speech :—
si aderit, venient (“if he be present, they will come”).
si adsit, veniant (“if he were to be present, they would
como”).
si adesset, venirent (“if he were now present, they would he
coming ”).
In the text the sense shows that it represents (3).
non hostem	spectare, “ what he looked at was not the
suggestion of the enemy, bnt the plain fact.” Hostem auctorem, like capta urbs, “ the capture of the city.”
Ariovisti mortem. In Bk. i. eh. liii. wo read of the flight of Ariovistus from battle, but nowhere is the manner of his death recorded. Presumably he was captured and killed.
ardere	extincta, “Gaul, brought under the Roman sway,
her military glory of the past extinguished, was blazing with wrath at the insults she had received.”
persuaderet. Seo on Bk. iv. eh. xvi. Id. Tho subjunctivo is used with a question in the third person, because in the direct the question was (Jitis persuadeat? “Who is to persuade?”
descendisse, “ had resorted to.”
si nihil esset durius, “if nothing unfortunate happened.”
Cottae	exitum, “as to Cotta and the malcontents, what
did their policy involve?”
10. at certe, “yet certainly.” At can be used to mark an apo- dosis, seil cannot.
longinqua obsidione, abi. abs.
This chapter is a good instance of the vivid style of writing.
in utramque partem. In has a distributive force (see on Bk. iv. ch. i. 11).
primis ordinibus = centurionibus primorum ordinum (see Introduction, p. xxiv).
Vincite, “ have it so.”
et id (sc. dheit). We should say “and then.”NOTES, HOOK V.	125
qui terrear, “to bo terrified;” qui consecutive=«< <</o. Notice the person of terrear.
gravissime ex vobis, “ more than the rest of you.”
fi. hi, the soldiers.
si gravius quid, “if anything at all serious happen.”
communem	sustineant, “would bear their share of the
fortunes of war with the rest.”
non, asyndeton, giving considerable force.
reiecti et relegati, “like utter outcasts.” For the two verbs expressing one strong idea, see on eh. xxvii. 23.
CllAI’TKH XXXI.
Consurgitur, impersonal, comprehendunt, by the hand.
facilem esso. Sec on eh. vi. IT).
si modo, “ provided only.”
0. disputatione, alii, of means or instrument; trans., “the question is debated at length.”
dat . . . manus, “gives way.” This is a metaphor from the formal action of surrender.
vigiliis, “in wakefulness.”
cum . . . circumspiceret, “looking round.” quid, “(to see) what.”
Omnia	augeatur, bracketed in Mcuscl’s texj. The sense is
certainly not clear. Two interpretations are possible; (1) “Everything is devised to make it impossible to remain without danger, and, at the same time, by causing fatigue and sleeplessness to the troops, to increase the danger (of departure).” This would be a stricturo on the utter ineompctency of the generals. The use of quare is unnatural. (2) “All reasons arc thought out and discussed why they cannot remain without danger, and why that danger is increased by the fatigue and sleeplessness of the troops.” The sentence would then be either (a) an explanation of consumitur vigiliis, &c., or (b) else a description of the efforts of Sabinus’ party to reconcile the troops to the decision for departure. Languore et vigiliis would then refer to the anticipated trials of a prolonged siege. This rendering gives a proper meaning to quare, but gives less point to the second half of the sentence. Of these interpretations, 2 (b) seems the best. Perhaps, as some think, the passage is out of place, and should bo inserted after perducitur, above, describing the efforts of Sabinus’ party in debate.c.ksar’s gallic war.
nee . . . et. See on Bk. iv. cli. i. ‘21; xxix. 11.
maneatur, impersonal.
ut quibus, “as if ’’ ; lit., “as men to whom” (see on Bk. iv. cli. xxiii. 13).
15. datum, sc. cusp, dependent on persuasum esset. Remember the two constructions of persuadeo—persuasum esf 7tii/ii: (a) ut pain, “to go” (purpose); (h) me ire, “that I am going” (ordinary aec. and infin. of indirect statement).
longissimo . . . impedimentis, abl. abs. That in the vicinity of an enemy the march out should be made with a lengthened and therefore weakened line, and with the encumbrance of a large quantity of baggage, shows the credulity and incompctency of Sabinus.
Chapter XXXII.
1. ex nocturno premitu vigiliisque, “from the noise and activity during the night” in the Roman camp.
3. a, “at a distance of” (see on Bk. iv. ch. xxii. 15).
5. ex utraque parte, “ at each end.”
Chatter XXXIII.
qui, causal, “since he.”
trepidare . . . concursare . . . disponere, historic infinitives.
haec, governed by /acere understood.
ut = ita vl.
deficere. We should say, “so that he seemed to be at a total loss.” This verb is also used intransitively with a dative in the same sense.
in ipso negotio, “ in the thick of things.”
qui, as above.
profectionis auctor non fuisset, “had not been in favour of marching.”
8. imperatoris, sc. officia praestabat.
per se omnia obire, “ perform all duties by ;■ i^rv.vcs.” quoque, abl. of quisque.
pronuntiare. This is a common idiom in T. 'Mii and Greek. Some subject to pronuntiare has to be mentally supplied. English idiom uses the passive, “bade orders to be given.” In the next chapter both idioms occur.
in orbem consisterent. See on Bk. iv. ch. xxxvii. 5.

























posse. See on eh. xxvi. 13.
quod	pertineat, “that his request would be able to be
granted as far as the soldiers’ lives were concerned.”
G. ipsi, Sabinus.
uocitum iri. impersonal. With verbs used impersonally, the periphrasis {/ore >J) is generally employed instead of the flit. infin. I»’*
V	unnunieat	excedant, “communicates with Cotta with
a view to quitting the fight, if he (Cotta) think tit.” Ut final is used loosely, dependent on communicat; si videatur, like pugna, being emphatic, is put outside the ut clause. Another way of taking the sentence is, “communicates with him to see if (a common use of si) he agrees to quitting.” This would make ut substantival, and dependent on videatur.  
muralium pilorum, long heavy javelins used in defence of a wall.
contabulantur, “are built in storeys.” pinnae, battlements or palisading of wood, loricae, “breastworks” of wicker-1work, “fascines.”
ex cratibus, attributive to loricae (see on Bk. iv. eh. xvi. 13). attexuntur, “are attached ” to the turres.
cum, “though.” tenuissima, “very delicate.”
16. ut, “to such an extent that.”
ultro	cogeretur. We should say, “he was compelled to
spare himself by the spontaneous action of the troops, who crowded round him with entreaties (or expostulations).” The adverb ultro is used to qualify concursu, which is a verbal noun.NOTES, BOOK V.
Chapter XLI.
sermonis aditum, “access to an interview.”
Facta potestate, “audience being granted.’'
egerat, “had treated of.”
faciundae, an old form of the gerundive.
qui . . . diffidant—i.e., “who themselves are in a precarious condition.”
hoc esse . . . animo, “such was their attitude towards."
inveterascere, “Become established.” per se, “as far as they are concerned."
utantur, jussive.
pro eius iustitia, “such was Ciesar’s sense of justice.”
Chapter NLI1.
spe. The Nervii had hoped to entrap Cicero with the same plausible arguments as had proved successful to Ambiorix in dealing with Sabinus.
nulla . . . copia, ablative absolute.
quae, “such as.”
gladiis. Notice the order, emphasising “with their swords.” The natural order, caespites (/ludiis circumcidere, would have meant something different—“they cut clods with their swords.”
exhaurire, “to dig out,” strictly goes only with manibus. With Bagulis, supply “they carried.” This figure is called zeuymu.
minus horis tribus, “in the course of less than three hours” ; tjuam omitted (see on Bk. iv. eh. x. 3).
milium passuum xv. It is almost impossible to believe mat the investing lines were fifteen (Roman, about fourteen English) miles in circumference. Perhaps, with some editors, instead of passuum we should read pedum (the best MSS. have the initial p only), which would be about two arid three-quarter miles.
valli, the Roman ram-	Testudo.
part.
falces, murales, also called asseres falcati, hooks shaped likeCLSAIt’S GALLIC WAIL
sickles Attached to poles, and used for tearing down fortifications. The besieged would endeavour to frustrato these by catching the heads in loops of rope.
testudines. Seo on ch. ix. 16. Here, movable sheds to pro- teet the storming parties. Rcc !,1 "ation on p. 131.
Chaptkr XL1II.
ferventes . . . glandes, red-hot balls of clay, hurled from leathern slings.
fusiles means that the balls had been moulded when soft, fervefacta can scarcely mean “red-hot,” as they could not
have been hurled by hand, and presumably the Gauls had no tormenta. Probably they had burning tow attached to them.
Casas. Strong wooden huts were used in winter camps.
stramentis . . . tectae, “ thatched ” (see on ch. xii. 7).
sicutl, “just as if,” with abl. abs. So with ryi rtsi, tatu/uam. This idiom is really elliptic. Here some verb liko clamarent is mentally supplied,
parta . . . atque explorata victoria, “a complete victory had been obtained” (see on ch. xxvii. 23).
nemo, emphatic position, “ not a single man.”
paene ne . . . quidem quisquam, “ scarcely a man even.” ac turn. Wo can bring out the force of these words by saying “and it was a time when all fought their hardest.”
gravissimus, ‘ ‘ most cri jal. ”
ut, “since.”
sub, “ close under.”
non dabant, “refused to give.”
turri, the enemies’. The Gauls were adopting all the Roman methods of attack.
vocare, of course ironically.
deturbati, sc. sunt Galll.
Ci TER LIV.
A magnificent piece of narrative.
1. qul, with consecutive force. Their bravery was bringing promotion.
inrumpit, sc. in earn partem.NOTES, BOOK V.
Ne . . . quidem, gives tho force of “ nor yet ... on his part ” (Greek, *al aur6t . . . oo).
vallo, “within tho rampart.”
quo	protegunt. See on Bk. iv. ch. xii, 4.
Transfigitur. In vivid narrative, the verb often is placed first in the sentence : so Avertit, Succurrit, below.
1G. Avertit . . . vaginam, “turns the sheath away from him,” thus causing delay in drawing the sword.
conantl. See on ch. xxxv. 12.
Succurrit	Vorenus. This is a beautiful example of deli
cate order. Succurrit has been noticed above. Inimicus gains force by lxhng placed next to succurrit, with which it is contrasted, and by being separated from Vorenus, which occupies an emphatic position at the end.
21. rem gerit, “fights.”
26. versavit, “dealt with.”
28. uter utri. Our idiom is, “which of the two ... to the other.”
Chapter XLV.
in dies, “day by day” (see on Bk. iv. ch. i. 11). axlme, quod, “chiefly owing to the fact that.”
res	pervenerat, “it had come to this, that there was a
scarcity of defenders.”
fidem praestiterat, “sworn fidelity.”
ad Caesarem, at Samarobriva (Amiens).
inligatas, “ folded in ” the shaft.
Chapter XLVI.
milia. See on Bk. iv. ch. x. 3.
posset, a variation in sequence, with special force, as Labienus, being amongst the unfriendly Treveri, was not likely to be able to come (see on ch. xl. 2).
veniat, jussive snbjunct., in semi-dependence on scribit.
Reliquam partem, tin troops under Roscius and Plancus.
10. ex proximis hibernis, presumably those of Crassus at Mont- didier. In that case the cavalry, travelling rapidly, preceded Crassus and the legion.CiESAlt’s GALLIC WAR.
Chapter XLVII.
progreditur. Cresar, with Trebonius’ legion, sets out immediately ; the advance-guard of Crassus’ army arrives at Samarobriva without waiting for the actual arrival of Crassus, whom he leaves in command.
praeficit. Caesar had already departed, but left word that Crassus was to take tho command.
litteras publicas, “public records” comprising the rolls of the legions, information collected from spies, accounts, &c.
G. non ita multum, like our colloquial “not so much,” means practically "not at all.”
ad eum, “against him.”
ne . . . non. Ciesai* might havo written nt.
praesertim quos . . . sciret, “especially as he knew that they."
quanto, “(to say) with what.”
educturus esset represents in the direct educerem, not educam (fut.) Tie did not mean to set out.
rem gestam in Eburonibus, the disaster to Sabinus and Cotta.
Chapter XLVIII.
etsi	reciderat, “although he was disappointed in his ex
pectation of three legions, and reduced to two; ” opinione, lit., "from his expectation.”
duas, his own and Fabius'.
Graecis litteris, “Greek language,” rather than merely Greek characters, with which the Gauls, if we may judge from the Helvetii (Ilk. i. eh. xxix.), were acquainted. According to Polyamus, tho words w'ere 6appe?u, Qo-/iQtiav nyo<r8e'xov, “be of good cheer; expect aid.” Caesar frequently used a simple cryptogram, substituting for a letter that which was fourth from it in the alphabet,
amentum was a leathern strap which was attached to the centre of the spear, and considerably increased the distance to which it could be thrown by imparting a rotatory movement to the missile.
periculum, of being mistaken by the Romans for an unfriendly Gaul.
biduo. We should expect the acc. of duration, but Caesar notNOTES, BOOK V.
unfrequently uses the abl. when the period is so Bhort as to make littlo difference between point of time and duration.
10. perlectam—i.e.% ho read it through to himself firBt: notice that epistolam has to bo supplied.
in conventu militum, “on parade.”
fumi; tlio plural implies “smoke in different places,” but we have no English equivalent.
19. adventus, “ about the arrival.” expulit, “ dispelled.”
Chapter XLIX.
relinquunt, “raise.”
Haec, attracted (for hi) to agreement with the predicate (Bee on Bk. i. ch. i. 1).
armata. The Gauls came omnibus copiis, including camp- followers, &c.
G. faciat, jussive, in semi-dependence on admonet.
Caesar. The position of the name inside tho abl. aba. is for the purpose of obviating the insertion of ad eumy showing to whom the despatch was brought.
animo, abl. of rospect, “in mind.” English idiom would probably omit it altogether, being less definite than Latin (see on Bk. i. ch. i. 5).
trana, not with progressus, but with conspicatur, as Caesar did not cross the valley and river till later (see below).
turn, “at the samo time.”
aequo animo, “with a clear conscience.”
milium septem. There were two legions, which thus contained 3500 men each, a number below normal (bcc Introduction, p. xxh).
angustiis viarum, “by narrowing tho passages (or streets) of the camp.” See plan, p. 81.
10. hostibus. See on ch. xxxv. 12.
speculatoribus, abl. of means or instrument.-
Chapter L.
Galli , . . Caesar, in apposition to utrique.
=i forto . . . posset, subordinate to the ut clause, and parallel wit si id efficere non posset, not “ to see if.”1. invitati, “tempted.”
in speciem, “merely for show.” In order to increase the enemy’s opinion of their state of terror, the Romans blocked up the gates with turf, so as to give the impression that no sortie was contemplated, yet with turf only one row thick, so that when the time came, the sortie could he easily made.
quod explains what follows, not what precedes :	because
they (the Gauls) seemed (to themselves) unable to force an entry by that way ”—i.e., through the gates.
1‘2. sic uti, “ to such good purpose that.”
occidit, occulo.
exuit—i.e., compelled them all to throw them away.
2. neque	videbat, “and because he saw that no chance was
left of inflicting even a small damage on them.” He had only 400 cavalry. These words are bracketed in Meusel’s edition, neque etiam—et ne , . . quidem.
5. producta, “paraded.”
non decimum quemque, “not one in ten.”
certius. Labienus’ letter had given him some information.
rem, the disaster to Sabinus and Cotta, proponit, “describes.”
quod	sit acceptum, “that the disaster, which lias been
received owing to the culpable rashness of a general.” The subjunct. is suboblique ; so relinquatur below.
hoc, either acc. antecedent to quod detrimentum, or abl. of measure with aequiore, “all the wore patiently,” anticipating quod causal which follows.





















2. quiu . . . mitterent, “ without sending.”
persuaderi potuit, "was able to be persuaded.” Remember the two meanings of a past tense of possum with the infin.: e.y., ]>otui ire, (1) “I was able to go (and went) ” ; (2) “I was able to go (and did not) ”—i.e., “ I could have gone.”
Ariovisti bello, in the first campaign, or 58 b.c.
Tencterorum transitu. In Bk. iv. 1.
Hac spe lapsus, “disappointed”; so ch. xlviii. 1, opinione delectus.
1. ultro, “spontaneously.”
veniri. Notice how frequently Caesar uses the impersonal construction when the stress is laid on the action and not on those who perform it.
Senones. Ch. liv. 4. They had expelled Cavarinus.
coguntur, general, not particular.
13. hue . . . per fines Remorum. The route from the Treveri to the Senones naturally lay through the Remi.
quam, indefinite.
8. sub, “close to.”
alias, . . . alias, adverb.
Labienus pursued the same taeties of feigned fear as Csesar bad.
11. praecipit atque interdicit. The command is expressed by petant (semi-dependent jussive subjunct.), the prohibition by neu vulneret. This command recalls that of Hazael, King of Syria, who commanded his captains to fight “neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel.”
13. petant . . . vulneret, expressive change from secondary to vivid sequence.
neu quis quern, both indefinite.
mora reliquorum, "delay over the rest”—i.e., caused by Romana pursuing the rest.